YOGA-SUTRAS OF
PATANJALI WITH
THE EXPOSITION
OF VYASA
A Translation and Commentary
Volume I—Samdadhi-pada
YOGA-SUTRAS OF
PATANJALI WITH
THE EXPOSITION
OF VYASA
A Translation and Commentary
by Pandit Usharbudh Arya, D.Litt.
Volume I—Saméadhi-pada
Foreword by
H. H. Swami Rama of the Himalayas
2
rm
The Himalayan Internationa! Institute
of Yoga Science and Philosophy of the U.S.A.
Honesdale, Pennsylvania
* 1986 by The Himalayan International Institute
of Yoga Science and Philosophy of the US A
RR 1, Box 400 ' Honesdale, Penns\lvama 18431
All righty reserved No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means
without permission in wruing from the publisher
Printed mm the United States of America
The paper used in thiy publication meets the muntmum requirements of American National
Standard for Information Sciences— Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Matenals, ANSI
PRY ASLIRA
Library ot Congress Cataloging in Publianon Data
Patsfjal
Yega-sutras of Patanjali sith the exposition of Vyasa
Biblgeaphy p
Includes index
TE Yoga arly works 1 Vyasa Il Arya, Usharbudh III Title
B132 ¥6P267 [9k5 IK 5-7570
ISBN 0-89 2K94092-8
3
SMBH TA: M-Prae-arad Tea | |
ferrets 319-eareante-A eA |
Contents
Acknowledgments ix
Foreword xi
Spelling and Pronunciation of Sanskrit xvii
Abbreviations of Commentaries xx
Other Texts Cited xxi

General Introduction
Part 1. Prologue 3
Part 2. Overview of Sankhya-yoga 23
Part 3. Tattva-samdasa-siitras 41
Yoga-siitras—Chapter One
Saméadhi-pada [Chapter on Samadhi]

Compendium of Sitras and Vyasa’s Bhashyva 51

Sitras I.1-1.51 with Vyasa’s Commentary
and the Author’s Discussion 59
Bibliography 431
Glossary / Index 439
Acknowledgments

My deepest appreciation, profound gratitude and sincerest thanks

to Shree
whose razor-sharp mind carefully balanced between a student’s
loyalty and an editor’s honesty, who took the book through
several stages of careful editing and typing, watching for the
minutest detail;

to Michael Smith, Fran Manley. Ronald Neuhaus and several others
who read the text for precise details of language and punctua-
tion and helped make it comprehensible:

to Rolf and Mary Gail Sovik
who served as administrators of the Center for Higher Con-
sciousness, organized my time, fed me, washed for me, watched
over my health and well-being, and remained at my disposal
twenty-four hours a day,

to several patron members of the Center for Higher Consciousness
whose generosity freed me of financial concerns,

to the editors and typesetters of the Himalayan Institute
whose silent devotion and service to the Guru’s mission never
seeks acknowledgment; and

to Lalita, my wite,
whose silent and unrewarded sacrifices make my work possible.

Lord, make me a servant of thy servants, dasanudasah.
Foreword

Yoga is a most ancient science, which has been taught for
thousands of years. Patafijali systematized and organized it by
formulating 196 aphorisms, which are called the Yoga-sitras. Some
scholars say Patafijali was born about 4,000 B.c and others 400
B.C., but the exact date is unknown. Patafijali was the codifier of
yoga science. He was a scientist who practiced and who gathered
together the information on yoga and presented it in a concise
form. The word sitra actually means “string,” and every aphorism
is like a single flower on a garland. Patafijali made the siitras
succinct because in ancient times students learned the sayings of
the great teachers by heart. This succinctness enabled the students
to easily memorize these truths. In those days, there was a very
close relationship between the preceptor and the student, who was
taught through this oral tradition. Only the competent and ac-
complished yogis could impart this knowledge to their students.

Patafiyali describes the entire philosophy of yoga science in the
Yoga-siitras, and the first four siitras summarize the most impor-
tant aspects of this science. The first aphorism says, “Now, then,
and therefore, yoga science and discipline is being expounded.”
This means that the student of yoga should understand that with-
out discipline, he cannot tread the path of yoga Only discipline
will help him on the path of enlightenment. The first word of the
first aphorism 1s atha. Atha means “now, then, and therefore.” It
xii FOREWORD

indicates that there is something important that needs to be under-
stood before one practices yoga. In most of the darshanas (schools
of philosophy) the word atha has been used as the first word at the
beginning of such scriptures, and most commentators think that
the word is auspicious. In reality, it indicates that the student is
prepared, for the preliminaries have been completed. Many stu-
dents eagerly study from scriptures and they briefly try to practice,
but they find it very difficult, and then give up the practice. Thus,
they don’t make any progress because they have not gone through
the preliminary steps of training. The first stitra means, “Now the
student may attain this step.” This indicates that the student has
already studied philosophy, he has studied the necessary Shastras
(scriptures), and now the yoga discipline is being expounded and
taught. So the word “now” denotes that the student has already
accomplished something. The student or aspirant has already com-
mitted himself to the path and has said, “Yes, I’m committed to
the path. I’m determined, and | want to follow the discipline.
Discipline will assist in my growth; it will help me to attain
liberation.”

The word yoga 1s very ancient and is found in the Vedas, the
most ancient scriptures known to man. It comes from the root sw,
“to unite.” Yoga is the union of the individual soul with the Ab-
solute One. The student of yoga has the capacity to unite himself
with the Cosmic One. He can do it if he 1s fully prepared, deter-
mined, and desirous, and if his mind is made one-pointed. The
modern student asks whether he has to renounce the world to
attain the goal of yogic science. Yoga science says that while one
does not have to renounce the world literally, there are conditions
required tor all sadhana (spiritual practice) Sadhana requires that
discipline must be systematically apphed. Yoga science does not
lay down commandments, but it requires commitments. If one 1s
committed to know the truth, and has the capacity and the ability,
then he can attain the highest state of wisdom, samadhi. When no
worldly fetters bind one, when nothing disturbs the mind, then one
knows how to live in the world and yet remain nonattached. Yoga
science recommends neither renunciation from the world nor
FOREWORD <xiii
excessive involvement in the world. Yoga requires that the student
avoid these two extremes. Patafijali leads one to know the real
Self, whether one is a renunciate or a householder. One simply has
to act in a way so that the goal, which is contentment, can be
attained. Absolute contentment means a state of equanimity, tran-
quility, and equilibrium.

The purpose of this science is to help students know their po-
tential and understand the various levels of their being, so that
finally they reach the highest state. The teachings of yoga science
are threefold: how to live within oneself, how to live in the external
world, and at the same time how to link the two and create a
bridge. Then one is liberated here and now.

The second siitra provides the definition of yoga: Yogash chitta
vrtti nirodhah, “Yoga is perfect control over the mind and its
modifications.” That 1s the definition of yoga. But there is another
message to the siitra; the other meaning is the assurance that with
the help of yogic practices, as explained by Pataiijali, a student can
definitely have such control over his mind and its modifications.

The definition given by Patafijali explains the ultimate goal of
yoga science. Yoga science is related to the mind, and mental life
in its totality. By practicing the method of yoga, one can attain
perfect control over the mind and its modifications. Yoga psy-
chology is the most ancient school of psychology, which describes
systematically, from the very beginning, how to know, analyze,
and direct the mind, so that one can attain the purpose of life. The
mind is one’s finest instrument. The body is the grossest instru-
ment, and breath is another, somewhat finer, instrument. The
senses are also considered instruments, but mind 1s the finest in-
strument of all A yogi is he who has complete control over his
body, senses and mind. When he has accomplished that, he has the
capacity to unite himself with the Ultimate Truth.

It’s not that the student has to learn something from outside
himself, that he has to acquire something. Patafijali says that the
student must learn abhyGsa and vairadgya, practice and nonattach-
ment. The mind presents barriers to practice and nonattachment.
It stands like a wall between the student and his goal in life. But
xiv FOREWORD
that same mind can be made an instrument for the attainment of
his goal.

First, one has to know the mind thoroughly with all its modi-
fications. Once the mind is understood, then it does not create
obstacles for the student. A yogi is one who knows the technique
of uniting himself with the Ultimate Reality. Thus, the second
siitra explains yoga science; it is a definition of yoga science.

The third siitra explains that when one has control over the
mind and its modifications, he establishes himself in his essential
nature. Man’s essential nature is peace, happiness, and bliss. The
ordinary person forgets his essential nature and identifies with his
thoughts and the forms and objects of the world. Patafijali says
that the essential nature of a human being is distinct from his
body, breath, senses, and mind. He says that the mind and its
mental processes prevent one from knowing the Absolute. When
one learns not to identify himself with the thought forms or objects
of the mind, he establishes himself in his essential nature. In the
yogic process one must purify the unconscious mind and then go
beyond the mire of delusion created by the unconscious and its
samskdras to get to the fountainhead of light and life, the center of
consciousness within. That is the meaning of the third siitra.

The fourth siitra states that if one has not attained perfect con-
trol over the mind and its modifications, then he identifies himself
with the thought waves and with the objects of the world and thus
remains ignorant of his true nature. All pain and misery is the
result of ignorance. When one removes that ignorance, and dispels
the darkness, then he attains the state of equilibrium, which brings
freedom from the bondage of karma and pain. One has to learn to
be free, to become master of himself. That mastery 1s attained by
practicing the yogic techniques taught in the aphorisms. Mind and
its modifications can be perfectly analyzed and controlled, and
then mind can be directed according to one’s aim 1n life.

The Yoga-sitras teach not just a philosophy but, most impor-
tantly, a specific method to practice. By studying them, a student
can understand that he is fully equipped to attain samadhi, the
highest state of tranquility, the center of consciousness within. The
FOREWORD xv
student acquires self-confidence by studying Patafijali’s siitras be-
cause the siitras say that the student can cultivate the power of
concentration and use it to remove the obstacles to enlightenment,
which cause all suffering.

Most people desire to enjoy the world, but for lack of inner
strength and a one-pointed mind, they are not able to do so. One
has to acquire the knowledge of how to control the mind and its
modifications through practice. Practice and commitment to a dis-
cipline come first. When the student starts practicing, he expe-
riences something which is supramental, and such extraordinary
experiences lead him to the deeper dimensions of life. One should
establish himself firmly on his meditation seat and make the body
steady and still on that seat, regularly—every day at the same time.
Steady posture, though a preliminary practice, is very important,
for it helps the student in attaining the meditative state. Gradually
one should increase the practice time, so he can remain still for a
longer period. After one accomplishes this, then he will find that
the breath is distracting the mind. Then one learns to breathe
harmoniously. Soon one will think in a calm and serene way. In
this way one can go beyond body, senses, and mind. One can go
beyond the reservoir of the impressions and samskdaras stored in
the unconscious mind, and finally attain the center of conscious-
ness. This 1s an inner journey which one can accomplish without
movement. Here on this path, one has to be steady, to be regular,
to be punctual, and gradually to work with the body, breath, and
the conscious and unconscious mind. Then one can go beyond
intellect to the center of consciousness.

This 1s called the path from the gross self to the subtlest Self.
The moment one completely devotes himself with one-pointedness,
he ts at the center of consciousness. The student becomes one with
the center of consciousness, as a drop of water or a river meets and
becomes one with the ocean. Slowly the individual self, which 1s
like a ripple in the vast ocean of bliss, becomes one and the same
with the ocean So the Yoga-sitras of Patafiyali teach the student
how to attain samadhi 1n this lifetime if he steadily practices and
works to control the mind.
xvi FOREWORD

Pandit Dr. Usharbudh Arya has written a commentary on the
Yoga-siitras in a very scholarly manner. No doubt this commen-
tary will be beneficial to researchers and to students who are eager
to study the ancient commentaries of Vyasa, Bhoja, Vachaspati,
and other commentators. Dr. Arya is both a scholar and an ac-
complished meditator. | have not come across any other commen-
tary that explains the Yoga-sitras in such a clear and brilliant
manner.

Swami Rama
The Spelling and Pronunciation
of Sanskrit Letters and Words
Sanskrit vowels are generally the same pure vowel sounds found
in Italian, Spanish, or French. The consonants are generally pro-

nounced as in English.
a organ, sum
a father
ai aisle
au sauerkraut
b= but
bh abhor
ch church
chh churchfill
d dough
d = dough (slightly toward the th sound of though)
dh adhere
dh adhere (slightly toward the theh sound of breathe here)
e prey
& go
gh doghouse
h [slight aspiration of preceding vowel]
h hot
1 it
i police
j= jump
jh = lodgehouse
k kid
kh_ workhorse
l no English equivalent; a short vowel pronounced
somewhat like the /ry in revelry
l lug
xvit’ SPELLING AND PRONUNCIATION OF SANSKRIT
tm [resonant nasalization of preceding vowel}
m mud
nh sing
n under
fi pifiata
n no
o no
p pub
ph uphill
r no English equivalent; a simple vowel r, such as
appears in many Slavonic languages
tT the same pronunciation as r, more prolonged
r rum
$h shawl (pronounced with a slight whistle;
German sprechen)
sh shun
s sun
t tomato
t water
th = an#hill
th Thailand
u push
a rude
Vv vodka (midway between wand v)
ysyes
Vowels. Every vowel is either long or short. The dipthongs e, ai, 0,
and au are always long; / is always short. Long a, i, u, and r are
indicated by a horizontal line over the vowel. The long form of a
vowel is pronounced twice as long as the short form.
Consonants. Sanskrit has many aspirated consonants, that is, con-
sonants pronounced with a slight A sound: bh chh dh dh gh jh kh
Ph th th. These aspirated consonants should be pronounced dis-
tinctly. The retroflex consonants, d dh n sh f th, are pronounced
SPELLING AND PRONUNCIATION OF SANSKRIT xix

with a hitting sound, as the tip of the tongue is curled back to the
ridge of the hard palate. The dentals, d dh n t th, are pronounced
with the tip of the tongue touching the upper teeth.
Accentuation. There is no strong accentuation of syllables. The
general rule is to stress the next-to-last syllable of a word, if that is
long. A syllable is long if (a) it has a long vowel or (5) its vowel is
followed by more than one consonant. If the next-to-last syllable
of a word 1s short, then the syllable before that receives the stress.*
*Fora better understanding of Sansknt pronunciation the student 1s referred to the author's
basic Sanskrit cassette tape course
Abbreviations of Commentaries

Code Author Title

AD  Ananta-deva Pandit Pada-chandrika

BB Bangali Baba The Yogasiitra of Patafijali

BG Bhavaganesha Pradipika or Pradipa

BM Baladeva Mishra Yoga-pradipika

BR Bhojaraja (Bhojadeva) Raja-marttanda (also known as
Bhoja-vrttt)

HA Hariharananda Aranya = Bhasvati

HA(E) Hariharananda Aranya Yoga Philosophy of Patanyali
(English commentary)

MA = Madhavacharya Patayijala-darshanam chapter of
the Sarva-darshana-sangraha

NB Nagoji Bhatta (Nagesha) Laghvi

NBB_ Nagoyji Bhatta (Nagesha) Brhati

NTB_ Narayana Tirtha Sutrartha-bodhini

NTC Narayana Tirtha Yoga-siddhanta-chandrika

RP Rama Prasada The Yoga Sutras of Patanyalt
(English translation)

RS Raghavananda Sarasvati Patafijala-rahasya

RY Ramananda Yat: Mani-prabha

Sh Shankara-bhagavat-pada Patafijala-yoga-siitra-
bhashya-vivarana

SS Sadashivendra Sarasvati Yoga-sudhakara

VB Vyfana-bhikshu Yoga-varttika and
Yoga-sdra-sangraha

VM — V&chaspati Mishra Tattva-vaisharadi
Other Texts Cited
Abbreviated
BhG Bhagavaa-gita
TSS Tattva-samdasa-siitras
YS Yoga-siitras of Patafijali with Vyasa’s Bhashyva
Non-Abbreviated
Aitareya Upanishad
Bhagavata-purana
Brahma-bindu Upanishad
Brahma-sitras
Brahma-vidya Upanishad
Brhadaranyaka Upanishad
Brhad-yogi-yajfiavalkya-smrti
Chhandogy'a Upanishad
Hamsa Upanishad
Katha Upanishad
Kaushitaki Upanishad
Kena Upanishad
Karma-purana
Lawbook of Manu
Mahabharata (Moksha-dharma-parvan)
Mahabhashyva of Patafijah
Mahopanishad
Maitri Upanishad
Mandikya Upanishad
Mundaka Upanishad
Nydyva-siitra of Gotama
Prashna Upanishad
Rg-veda
Sankhya-karika
Shvetashvatara Upanishad
Vayu-puradna
Vishnu-puradna
Yajur-veda
Yoga-vasishtha
General Introduction
Part 1
Prologue

If all the vast traditions of India’s philosophies and literatures
were to vanish and the Yoga-siitras of Patafijali alone were to be
saved, each of those philosophies and literatures could in time be
created again. They could be created again not because their de-
tails or even basic formulas appear in the Yoga-siitras, but because
these siitras form the manual of the yoga practice, the culmination
of which is that process of intuitive knowledge which alone con-
stituted the source of almost all of India’s philosophies and litera-
tures. The founders of all Indian sciences such as physics, chemis-
try, mathematics, astronomy, medicine, archery, polity, poetics,
dance, music, dramaturgy, cosmology or metaphysics were all
rshis, those who have entered the state of samadhi and thereafter
brought forth a given science of their choice because of their com-
passion for human beings. It is made very clear in the siitras that
through the process of samadhi one may receive any or all branches
of knowledge, which may then be revealed to the world While
thus serving as a conduit for such worldly knowledge one may yet
dwell in a Consciousness which transcends such intuitive knowl-
edge. The Yoga-sitras teach the methods for the mastery of both;
therefore one may easily conclude that they contain the seed of
Indian sciences and philosophies as well as the Indian spirituality—
this last forming the link between science and philosophy. If there

3
4 INTRODUCTION: PART 1
were no more India in the geography of the world, if the highest
Himalayan peak were submerged under the ocean, if every Indian
language and text were to perish completely, but if there were to
survive one single yogi who has reached samadhi, all the Vedas,
Upanishads and the Bhagavad-gita would again flow from his
mouth—indeed in a new form—and, to repeat, all the principles of
ayur-veda, dance, drama, music, medicine, dramaturgy, poetics
and the rest would be re-created. A whole new civilisation parallel-
ing the experience of India’s civilisation would come to exist and
would nourish ever-fresh streams of spirituality in all the then-
existing or future civilisations of the world. It is not that the siitras
by themselves would produce this effect, but the practical guidance
given therein would bring forth in an aspirant that realization of
knowledge, power and wisdom which, when well wielded, creates
civilisations. This can be attested to by looking at the benevolent
changes that have occurred in civilisations to which yoga practice
and philosophy were introduced from time to time and in various
guises and forms. There is insufficient space here for a detailed
study of this history.
It 1s therefore essential that a translation and explanation of the
Yoga-siitras of Patafijali be made available, which will
eaddress its subject matter from within the initiatory tradition of
the Himalayan masters, the founders and the continuing authori-
tative teachers of yoga science,
«incorporate the essentials of information and exposition given in
the exegetical tradition of all past commentators whose works
are available, and
*remain true to the basic tenets of the formal Sankhya-yoga school
of philosophy.
This task has been undertaken in the translation and commentary
being presented here. Before going further with an apologia for
this work, it is essential to review briefly the primary sources for
the study of the Yoga-sitras.
The tradition of India’s philosophical lineages is lost in antiquity.
According to one Tantric text (Shri-vidyarnava) there were seventy-
one teachers from Kapila, the founder of Sankhya, to the greatest
PROLOGUE 5
proponent of Vedanta, Shankardcharya,! who taught at the end of
the seventh and beginning of the eighth century A.D.; and from
Shankara to the present day a lineage of up to seventy-six teachers
has been enumerated. If this appears to be a long time, the reader
might find interesting the fact that in approximately 1400 B.c. the
Brhadaranyaka Upanishad (V1.5.1-4) enumerated sixty-six genera-
tions of teachers up to that time. Patafijali in his work on grammar
speaks of eighty-four thousand rshis. Within the Indian tradition it
is almost impossible to assign a date to the rshis, for they are
custodians and conduits of a perennial knowledge which is revealed
repeatedly in each cycle of creation. They are self-authoritative and
their work is internally self-evident (svatah-pram4na), requiring no
other authority to approve it and not measurable by any yardstick
external to divine revelation, but serving as the measure for others.

Both Patajijali and Vyasa are regarded by the traditions as rshis,
their words equally authentic. In the lineage of the yoga philosophy
the two names have been inseparably coupled together so that in
spite of the existence of later independent commentaries the word
Yoga-sitra calls forth the name of Vyasa in the mind. The associa-
tion is strengthened even more when some of Patafijali’s words in
his work on grammar, the Mahabhashya, echo those of Vydsa’s
commentary on the Yoga-siitras or vice versa.

The texts in the siltra style bear no resemblance to any other
genre of writing in any tradition. The word sutra is often translated
as “aphorism.” However, an aphorism can be read and understood
on its own A sitra is often unintelligible by itself. It is always, like
a mantra,” perhaps only slightly less, in need of an exposition. It is
1 This also might raise the question as to a possible confusion of Sankhya and Vedanta
lineages So far as the knowledge of Ultimate Reality and Truth 1s concerned, the lineage is
all one One of the titles held by the ShankarAchdryas up to this day 1s “Teacher and
Protector of the threefold Sankhya ” One particular monastic seat of the Dashanami
monastic order of the followers of Shankara, the Mahanirvani sect at Prayag. considers
Kapila as the incarnate form of the deity to be worshipped at this particular seat Kapila, it
should be noted, 1s one of the twenty-four major incarnations of God in the traditions of
2 For details of the inspirational! process in the revelation of a mantra see the author’s work
Mantra and Mediation (Honesdale, Pa Himalayan International Institute of Yoga Science
and Philosophy, 1981)
6 INTRODUCTION: PARTI
an extremely succinct statement of a truth which has been realized
by a rshi in the state of samadhi. In other words, the shortness of a
siitra is not, as is made out by many modern scholars, only a
mnemonic device because it is taught in an oral tradition. It is,
however, certainly both an inspired utterance and a mnemonic
formula in need of much background information. Such informa-
tion was imparted to close disciples within the tradition in day
after day of study. The teacher sat on a little elevated seat, perhaps
under a tree or in a mud hut or by the daily, ritual sacred fire. The
disciple sat intent facing the teacher maintaining the same posture
throughout the session. The slightest movement on his part was
considered an interruption. He had no tape recorders or notebooks.
Only through his immense power of concentration did he remember
all that was taught. Later he recited the lesson to himself during
svadhydya sessions to imprint them on his memory. Furthermore
there were either separate experiential sessions or sometimes the
guru might flash an experience into the consciousness of a select
disciple alone while enunciating the rules orally to the less pre-
pared. This is the experience of select disciples even now. And even
now it is thus that a few close disciples have learnt at the feet of a
guru. Among the disciples thus taught, the most advanced ones
composed a commentary, which may be either a
vrttt word-for-word explanation of the siitra alone, or
bhashya: including much background and experiential informa-
tion, showing the connection of many siitras to each other,
refuting the views of opponents, adding many “fillers” needed
to render the sitra comprehensible.
A bhashya composed by a realized scholar (Gcharya) may be fairly
lengthy, such as Shankara’s Bhdshya on the Brahma-sitras of the
Vedanta philosophy. One taught by a rshi 1s often only slightly less
succinct than the sitra itself, requiring another commentary or
gloss (tika@) by later scholars. Vyasa’s Bhashya is in this latter
category, with numerous sikds thereupon, which may need further
sub-glosses (upa-rikds).
The vrttis, bhashyas and sikas require not only that one should
PROLOGUE 7
be taught within the tradition of the school so that the in-school
information and, in the case of yoga, experience will be made
available but also that the commentator will be familiar with that
special branch of knowledge which was developed specifically to
establish the rules of the siitra interpretation. The rules were de-
veloped especially (a) in the schools of grammar, (b) in the Mi-
mamsa philosophy that deals with the interpretation of Vedic
utterances, (c) in the Nydya schools of logic, and (d) within each
school of philosophy for its own development and later interpreta-
tion. A commentator succeeds in his work of interpretation only to
the degree to which he has been immersed (nishndta) in these
sources and methods. It is regrettable that many commentators on
the Yoga-sitras, whether writing in Sanskrit or in the modern
languages, are sadly lacking in one or the other of these qualifi-
cations.

It may be argued that, unlike the schools of Vedanta, Mimarsa
and Nydaya systems of philosophy, the Sankhya and Yoga systems
have no continuing ancient schools where the in-school knowledge
may be imparted. This may be agreed to in the case of Sankhya,
but Yoga is a living school—if there is any—and the masters con-
tinue to teach the Yoga-sitras in the ashrams and cave monasteries
in an unbroken lineage, primarily as an experiential discipline be-
cause Yoga philosophy exists only on the basis of its practices.
Because the categories of Sankhya philosophy are so closely allied
to the Yoga system, the Sankhya tradition has survived as a sup-
portive school in association with Yoga. The Yoga school of
philosophy is often referred to as Sankhya-yoga, but a note of
caution must be maintained in doing so. Not all the categories of
Sankhya are used in Yoga, as even a cursory comparison of the
Tattva-samasa-sitras and the Yoga-sitras will show. The categories
of Sankhya philosophy are employed practically by all the schools
of Indian philosophy to a greater or lesser degree. They are em-
ployed more in Yoga philosophy; that is all there is to Yoga phi-
losophy being termed Sankhya-yoga. Sankhya philosophy proper
has its own independent existence and does not refer to much of
the practical system of Yoga and cannot return the compliment by
8 INTRODUCTION: PARTI

calling itself Sankhya-yoga. The Yoga philosophy, both in Patafi-
jali’s work by itself and as expounded by Vyasa, does depend on
parts of the Sankhya system and even gives it a new interpretation.
It does not thereby lose its independent existence as a separate
school of philosophy. It is thus that Vyasa’s commentary is called

Sankhya-pravachana-bhashya: An Exposition That Enunciates

Sankhya.
Sankhya-pravachana (“Enunciation of Sankhya”) is an alternative
title of the Yoga-sitras.

It is not, therefore, that “Vyasa . . . often foist[s] on Yoga the
philosophy of Sankhya”3 or that one needs to “combat the over-
powering influence exercised by Vyasa’s scholium,™ but rather
that Vyasa, having fully mastered both the Yoga and Sankhya
systems, clarifies Patafijali’s work with regard to both its Yoga and
the relevant parts of its Sankhya contents—but within the context
of Yoga. The later vrttis like that of Bhoja are excellent in that
they give a word-for-word breakdown of the siitras, but the scope
of philosophical knowledge as well as experiential authenticity is
often lacking in them.

It is not our purpose in this prologue to attempt even a scant
discussion of the scholarly problems attendant upon the philosophy
and textual composition or even dates of the authorship of the

Yoga-siitras and the Sankhya-pravachana-bhashya, the Bhadshya,
in short. Suffice it to say that like much of the tradition in India
we regard the works of Patafijali and Vyasa as a single composite
whole, a single text the two parts of which complement each other
and on which alone rests the authority of all other vrttis and tikas
because it is thus that the tradition of the Himalayan masters
would have it.

3 J W Hauer, quoted by Georg Feuerstein, The Yoga-Siitra of Patafyah An Exercise in
the Methodology of Textual Analysis (New Delhi Arnold-Heinemann, 1979), p 25

4 Georg Feuerstein, Preface to The Philosophy of Classical Yoga (New York St Martin's
Press, 1980, Manchester Manchester University Press, 1980), p 1x
PROLOGUE 9

It is also not our purpose to produce a critical edition of the
texts of the Yoga-sitras. Although some sitras do have variant
readings as found in manuscripts and commentaries, for our pur-
pose we have simply accepted the renderings of Vyasa and Vachas-
pati Mishra.

Now, let us briefly introduce the various commentaries and their
authors:

1. (A) Tattva-vaisharadi (literally, “Expert Exposition of the
Fundamentals”), a ¢ik@ by Vachaspati Mishra, is the one most
important work after the Bhashya of Vyasa. Vachaspati Mishra
(VM) was born towards the end of the eighth century A.D., and in
addition to Tattva-vaishadradi on Yoga, wrote commentaries on
Sankhya, Nydya and the Vedanta systems. A savant of unique
qualifications, he did not attempt to establish a philosophical
system of his own and was content to attempt a lucid explanation
of whichever text or philosophical system he was writing on. It
does not appear that he was an accomplished yogi, but his com-
mentary on Vyasa is still the most helpful one. We have, therefore,
incorporated most of his explanations 1n our discussions.

(B) Patafijala-rahasya (“The Secret of Patafijali’s System”) is
a sub-commentary (upa-fik@) on VM’s work by Raghavananda
Sarasvati (RS) of uncertain but definitely recent date. It attempts
to explain arbitrarily chosen phrases from VM, especially on the
points of grammar and the procedures of formal logic. Here and
there it has provided helpful hints to add to our own discussions.

2. (A) Yoga-varttikas (“Exposition on Yoga”) of Vijfiana-bhikshu
(VB), born in the sixteenth century A D., is considered the second
most important commentary (fika) on Vyasa. VB is said to have
authored sixteen works on widely ranging schools and topics of
philosophy. One of his main contributions is his attempt to establish
the points of unity between dualist Sankhya and monist Ved4nta,
with the result that the authorities of both schools tend to disown
5 The term varittha means an aphoristic statement that takes into account the stated,
unstated-but-implied, and difficult-to-understand points of an omginal sitra The title ot
VB’s work, however, uses the term very broadly
10 INTRODUCTION: PARTI

him. In his commentary on Vyasa he tries to read Vedanta into the
Yoga-siitras, and in doing so, distorts the original intent of Patafi-
jali and Vyasa. For example, his theory that purusha is a recipient
of reflections from prakyti is totally against the tenets of Sankhya-
yoga philosophy. In order to support his views on many issues, he
quotes copiously from other texts such as the Upanishads, Bha-
gavad-gita and the Puranas. Only in the discussions on the first
few siltras have we examined his peculiar views; thereafter we have
ignored his argumentations. But we have incorporated what he
says that is supportive of the intent of Patafijali and Vyasa.

(B) Pradipika or Pradipa (“That Which Sheds Light”), the
vriti by VB’s disciple, Bhavaganesha (BG), summarizes VB’s com-
mentary adding some observations of its own. We have accorded
BG’s views the same consideration as those of VB himself.

(C) Nagoji Bhatta or Nagesha (NB) was perhaps the greatest
learned man of the latter part of the sixteenth century. His works
on grammar, the philosophy of grammar, Vedanta and so forth
are considered definitive, and are studied not merely as commen-
taries but as original works. There are two commentaries (vrttis)
by him on Pataiijali:

(i) Laghvi (NB), the shorter one, which seems to be a
summary of VB’s work with few observations of his own.

(1) Brhati (NBB), the longer one, which incorporates the
salient points of Laghvi with much additional discussion.

With his own profound scholarship of Vedanta it was natural
for him to follow VB’s lead in trying to synthesize the dualist and
the monist systems Ignoring again this aspect of his work, our
discussion takes into account his explanations of the Sankhya-
yoga view proper. NB begins his larger commentary (NBB) by
stating that his purpose is to resolve the controversy between
Vedanta and Yoga. Even though he and BG for the most part echo
VB, they are pronounced Vedantins and try throughout to reconcile
the path of knowledge (fidna) as taught by Vedanta with the
teachings of Patafiyali and Vydsa. To this end they often quote
such verses as:
PROLOGUE Il
Knowledge and yoga are taught to be separate only by the fool-
ish and not by the wise. . .. Only he sees truth who sees knowl-
edge and yoga to be one.
Bhagavad-gita V.4,5

3. Raja-marttanda (“The Royal Sun”), also known as Bhoja-
vrtti, is by the savant king Bhojadeva, or Bhojaraja (BR), 1019-
1054 A D. He was an accomplished poet, a theoretician of poetry
and an author on many sciences such as architecture. Of the royal
patrons of arts, poetry, philosophy and the sciences, his name
comes among the first. His vrtti is on Patafijali, and is almost
totally independent, although it incorporates some of Vyasa’s ex-
position. It is a work, as a vrtti has to be, with only brief argumen-
tation here and there, and carries the force of a personal conviction
and, without exaggeration, of a personal experience of yoga.

4. Narayana Tirtha (fourteenth century) is a unique commen-
tator, who does not depend on Vyasa. He was a scholar in Valla-
bhacharya’s tradition, which incorporated some of the Vedanta
views into the context of bhakti (devotion and surrender) to a
divine incarnation, namely Krishna. NT has written two commen-
taries:

(A) Sitrartha-bodhini (“That Which Helps the Understanding
of the Meaning of Siitras”) (NTB), a vrtti, is the shorter of the two,
with succinct remarks on the words in the sutra.

(B) Yoga-siddhanta-chandrika (“Moonlight on the Tenets of
Yoga”) (NTC), a bhashya, is the more detailed commentary.

NTC not only tries to give the Yoga-siitras a perspective of
bhakti-yoga but also fills in much information on other systems of
yoga, such as details of the kundalini and chakras as well as the
various techniques of hatha-yoga. In other words, it shows the
connections of all the systems of yoga with the Yoga-sitras. The
information given on these systems is not anything unfamiliar to
the student of yoga; but to show which sitras contain the seeds of
which tenets and techniques of those systems is a very important
contribution. In our discussion we have omitted these details from
NTC, but an appendix will be added to the end of Chapter 4 to
12. INTRODUCTION: PART 1
indicate the seeds of the various systems as found in the Yoga-
sitras.

5. (A) Ramananda Yati (RY) (sixteenth century) wrote Mani-

prabha (“The Lustre of Jewels”), a brief 7k@ on Vyasa.

(B) Sadashivendra Sarasvati (SS) (eighteenth century) wrote
Yoga-sudhakara (“The Moon of Yoga”).

(C) Ananta-deva Pandit (AD) (nineteenth century) wrote Pada-
chandrika (“Moonlight on Words”), which for the most part scans
the Raja-marttanda of Bhojaraja.

(D) Baladeva Mishra (BM) (twentieth century) summarizes
Vachaspati’s work in Yoga-pradipika.

All of these were aspiring sadhakas who have often paraphrased
from the work of previous commentators. The works of SS, AD
and BM are difficult to place as to whether they are vryftis or fikds.
However, in places they do provide delightful, original insights;
and this is especially true of RY’s work, which is the most detailed
of the four and shows the mark of a profound writer with some
deep spiritual experience.

6. Hariharananda Aranya (HA) (nineteenth and twentieth cen-
turies) wrote Bhasvati (“The Luminous One”). He was responsible
for reviving the Sankhya teaching by establishing a school for that
purpose. He wrote many independent works on Sankhya in San-
skrit. Bhasvati is a lucid commentary meant for the layman not
interested in the disputations of dogma. It adheres strictly to the
original Sankhya-yoga views without attempting compromises with
any other schools of philosophy and totally ignores the syncretic

approach of VB et al. Of course, HA’s insights have been incor-
porated into our discussions

7 In an entirely different category comes a very detailed com-
mentary attributed to Shankara (Sh). P&tafijala-yoga-sittra-bhashya-
vivarana (“An Exposition on the Bhashya”) 1s a work explaining
Vyasa’s Bhdshya and 1s not so overly Vedantic as to becloud the
Sankhya tenets. Because of its originality it could easily be called a
bhashya in its own right. Any efforts to prove that it is a work of
the first Shankaracharya are feeble; obviously it was composed by
one of the later Shankaracharyas. In spite of its complete originality
PROLOGUE 13
and importance we have taken no note of it in our discussions
because to do so would double the size of the present book and
also because Trevor Leggett’s verbatim translation® is most accurate
and reliable.

The foregoing are the commentaries in Sanskrit, some of which
have been published in numerous editions with footnotes provided
by Sanskrit scholars.’ In addition there exist at least the following
summaries of the philosophy of Patafijali:

1. The chapter on Patafijali’s philosophy in MAadhava’s Sarva-
darshana-sangraha (MA) (“Compendium of All Philosophies”)

2. Yoga-sdra-sangraha (“Collection of the Essence of Yoga”) of
Vijfiana-bhikshu,’ an independent treatise summarizing VB’s inter-
pretation of Patafijali’s philosophy

3. The chapter on Patafijali’s philosophy in the Jaina teacher
Hari Bhadra Suri’s eighth century A D work Shad-darsShana-samu-
cchaya (“Compendium of S1x Philosophies”) and Gunaratna’s com-
mentary thereupon?

4. The chapter on Patafijali’s philosophy in the Jaina teacher
Rajashekhara’s Shad-darsShana-samucchaya (“Compendium of Six
Philosophies”)!¢
6 Trevor Leggett, Sankara on the Yoga-satra-s The Vivarana sub-commentary to b\asa-
bhdsva on the Yoga-sitra-s of Patafyalt, vol 1, Samadhi, vol 2, Veans (London Rout-
ledge and Kegan Paul, 1981 1983)

7 The tollowing minor commentaries were not available at the time of writing (1) Balarama
Udasina’s Commentary on the Yoga-sutras,ed K B R Sinha (Bankipore 1867. 1897), (2)
Krishna-vallabhacharya’s Arrana, a sub-commentary on Bhoyaraya’s work, ed Shveta-vai-
kuntha Shastrt and Narayana Sharana Shastri (Banaras 1939) The titles of sixteen other
commentaries Which are not available have been listed by Dr Nalini Shukla in her Pararyals-
voua-sitra ha vivechandimak evam tulandtmak adhvavan(A critical and comparative studs
of Patafjala-y oga-sitra, in Hindi) (Kanpur Shaku-yogashram and Nalini Shukla, 1975)

& Readers may consult the excellent English translation of thiy text by Ganganatha Jha
(Madras India [Theosophical Publishing House, 1933)

9 For details of published editions see Karl H Potter comp. Bibliography of Indian
Philosophies. rev ed vol 1 ot The Enciclopedia of Indian Philosophies, published tor the
American Institute of Indian Studies by Motilal Banarsidass (Delhi, 1979), pp 184 and 329
The forthcoming sixth volume of the encyclopedia, enutled Yoga Philosophy, will contain
more detailed information on yoga texts

10 Ibid. p 198
14. INTRODUCTION: PART 1

5. The chapter on Patajfijali’s philosophy in Rama-bhadra Dik-
shita’s “Shad-darshana-siddhanta-sangraha” (“Collection of the
Doctrines of the Six Philosophies”), never published, only a manu-
script in the Tanjore Library

The first two have been taken into account in our discussions on
the first few siitras only. Madhava’s work will be used in helping to
provide a final summary of Patafijali's philosophy at the end of
Chapter 4. One and only one thorough study comparing the views
of all these commentators on every conceivable topic of the Yoga-
siitras has ever been made. Unfortunately for our readers it is in
Hindi.!!

There exist a number of unpublished Sanskrit commentaries on
the Yoga-siitras in manuscript form, but these were not available
at the time of this writing. It is also most probable that many
ancient commentaries have been lost to arson by Muslim con-
querors, discontinuity of a line of teachers and neglect by owners,
which has always provided ancient books as a meal for termites.
One example of a lost commentary 1s that of a versified version
from which Alberuni translated into Arabic.!2

There have been numerous translations of the Yoga-sitras into
English, from J. R Ballentyne (1852) to Georg Feuerstein (1980).
Most of these translations include Vydsa’s Bhadshva. Vachaspati’s
commentary, Tattva-vaishdaradi, was translated twice, Bhoja’s Raja-
marttanda once, and Yati’s Mani-prabha once. Trevor Leggett’s re-
cent translation of Shankara’s Vivarana has been mentioned above.
A complete list of these publications can be found in the indexes
provided in numerous scholarly publications!*? on the Yoga-sitras.
1] Vimla Karnajak, 4 Critical Studs of the Patanjala-yoga-sutra in the Light of Its Com-
mentators (in Hind), Banaras Hindu University Sanskrit Series no 10, 1974

12 For turther information see (1) Shlomo Pines and Tuvia Gelblum, “Al-Birdini’s Arabic
Version ot Patafyall’s Yogasaitra,” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 29
(1966), pp 302-25, and vol 40 (1977). pp 522-49, (2)Ahmad Hasan Dam, A/berunt’s Indica
CUslamabad, Pakistan University of Islamabad Press, 1973)

13 Those most interested ina research of this type may begin by looking at the Bibliography
in Georg Feuerstein’s The Yoga-sdtra of Patafijalt An Exercise in the Methodology of
alae Delhi Arnold-Heinemann, 1979) Also see Potter, Bibhography of
PROLOGUE 15

Of these translations the ones by J. H. Woods!4 and by I. K.
Taimni!> are the most well known in the West, the first among
scholars and the second among aspirants of yoga. We have ignored
both of these completely in our discussions. The translation of the
Yoga-sittras with the Bhashya of Vyasa and the commentary of
Vachaspati by Woods, though a prestigious volume first published
in the Harvard Oriental Series, is a scholar’s exercise to replace
Sanskrit words with English ones! It shows little or no understand-
ing of the traditions of the Yoga school of philosophy nor famil-
iarity with experiential yoga practice. Taimni’s work was also
completely ignored because it attempts to foist theosophical doc-
trine on Patafijali and Vyasa.

From time to time in our work three English translations have
been consulted:

1. Translation of the Yoga-siitras, with Vyasa’s Bhashya and
Vachaspati’s Tattva-vaisharadi, by Rama Prasada (RP).'¢ The
translator was not a yogi but his work at least shows the mark of a
man learned in the conventions of the Sanskrit philosophical tra-
dition. From the point of view of a practitioner of yoga this work
exhibits some of the same deficiencies as those in the work of J. H.
Wood.

2. Translation of the Yoga-siitras and Vyasa’s Bhashya by Hari-
harananda Aranya [HA(E)], with an extensive commentary originally
in Bangla (Bengali), rendered into English.'? This is one of the
most heartwarming works on the Yoga-siitras by someone who not
only revived the teaching of Sankhya-yoga, but was a great San-
skrit scholar as well as a practising yogi.

14 James Haughton Woods, The Yoga-System of Patanjali, Harvard Oriental Series, vol
17 (1914, reprint, Delhi Motilal Banarsidass, 1927)

15. 1. K. Taimni, The Science of Yoga (Madras, India, and Wheaton, Ill Theosophical
Publishing House, 1961)

16 Rama Prasada, trans , The Yoga-siitras of Patafyalt with the Commentary of Vvasa and
the Gloss of Vachaspati Mishra (1912: reprint, New York AMS Press, 1974)

17 Swami Hariharénanda Aranya, Yoga Philosophy of Patafyal (Calcutta University of
Calcutta, 1977)
16 INTRODUCTION. PART!

3. Translation of the Yoga-sitras with Vy4sa’s Bhashya by Ban-
gali Baba!* (BB). This translation shows a depth in and an adher-
ence to the scholastic, philosophical, monastic and experiential
traditions all at once! Especially in the copious footnotes the trans-
lator explains fine points of philosophy and exhibits his authentic
learning. The choice of English words for the Sanskrit terminology
is arbitrary without a clear definition of the English terms used.

If, rarely and sporadically, we have borrowed any words from

any of the above translations, it has been done with due acknowl-
edgment. Any similarities between our work and theirs, if not duly
acknowledged, is quite accidental and unintentional. The works of
Western scholars such as Ballentyne, Boissenain, Deussen, Eliade,
Feuerstein, Frauwallner, Garbe, Hauer, Hopkins, Hultzsch, Jacobi,
Janaéek, Johnston, Judge, Koelman, von Mangoldt, Pensa!? and
others, as well as the westernized Eastern scholars such as Das-
gupta and Takagi, were found to have no bearing on the purpose
of this translation. Our present interests do not coincide with the
academic discussions of those scholars, based as they are only on
partial resources insofar as (a) the experiential tradition and (5)
the exegetical tradition are concerned. Without a thorough grasp
of these the details of the hermeneutics of the Yoga-sitras remain
a mystery, giving way to much academic speculation. Students and
scholars whose primary interest, however, 1s in writing doctoral
theses and such will make a grave mistake in not taking into
consideration the writings of these highly trained, scholarly, well-
informed, well-read, careful, academic minds Their interest is
study; our interest is the practice.

The purpose of the present translation and commentary is to
open the Yuga-siitras to the serious English-reading aspirant. Much
of the information and explanation that was not open before 1s
being made available in such a way, it is hoped, that it can be
helpful to those who wish to embark not merely on study but on
{8 Published by Motlal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1976
Tea ameter esgheceie res to have the most sensitivity for
PROLOGUE 17
the long-term practice of yoga as explained in Sitra 1.14. However,
the academicians will find that all the scholarly norms and rules
have been carefully observed, that convictions of the tradition have
not been permitted to overcloud the clarity of academically estab-
lished facts, and that the translation as well as the discussion on
each sitra will serve as a useful source of information to all.

Many students used to a syllogistic construction of subject
matter may find themselves somewhat at sea when they try to
follow the argument from one sitra to the next, or even the pro-
gression of argument within the explanation provided on each
sitra. Partly this may be so because of their unfamiliarity with the
basics of Indian philosophy, the many tenets of which are accepted
as “given” in preparing this work. Secondly, the scheme and order
of the siitras as created by the original rshi has its own reasons; it
is not in a random sequence. The word sirra, related to English
“suture,” means “a thread.” It may be so because there runs a
connecting thread of ideas from the beginning to the end of a sitra
text. Many scholars fail to comprehend the inner connections
among the sitras, as well as their relationship with the steps of a
guided practice. They also often ignore the maxims of sitra inter-
pretation as explained on page 6 of this prologue. Their approach
is criticised rightly in the following words:

In contrast to the approach adopted by many Orientalists who @
prior! tend to deny the unity of the text under examination,
fragmenting it into so many parts or heterogeneous strata until
nothing remains, Feuerstein mghtly asks in his methodological
study whether this compulsive search for incongruencies and
textual corruptions is not the expression of an ethnocentric
rationalising mentality which inclines to project everywhere tts
own need for abstract and absolute logic, and hence ts particu-
larly prone to misinterpret paradoxical expressions so common
in eastern thought, which has a penchant for transcending dualism

and therefore in part also rational language as such *?

20 Corrado Pensa, Foreword to The Philosophy of Classwal Yoga by Georg Feuerstein
(New York St Martin’s Press, 1980, Manchester Manchester University Press, 1980)
18 INTRODUCTION: PART 1

We offer the same explanation for our approach to accepting
the text on its own authority as a complete whole. One should not
start studying the texts of rshis part by part, constructed para-
graph by constructed paragraph. The entire text, with each detail
in its own place, should be studied, mastered, contemplated, in
that order. Slowly the hidden scheme of the entire whole will begin
to emerge. This overall picture of the scheme will be provided at
the end of Chapter 4. Meanwhile it should be borne in mind that
the present work is not an original thesis. It is a commentary.

A commentary consists of comments on an earlier, original
work and follows the scheme of the same. The subject matter in
our discussions follows the scheme of Patafijali and Vyasa. The
words and ideas are explained in the order in which these occur in
their work. Once again, one should read Patafijali’s and Vydsa’s
text, then the discussion, and again the text in the light of the
discussion. This will help the reader to grasp the intent of the
whole text rather than piecemeal ideas separately. Here and there,
for ease of comprehension, a separate, clearer paraphrase or sum-
mary of Vyasa’s Bhadshya is provided after the same has been
translated.

In translating from Sanskrit into English there always arises the
problem of multilevel meanings of Sanskrit words. Most words
have at least two categories of meaning:

vaugiha. derivative meaning, derived from the verb root of its
origin for example, sutra from the verb root siv ‘to sew’
radhi. conventional meaning, most often based on the derivative
meaning. for example, stra ‘a thread, something to sew with’
Some words may even be derived from several different roots.
Sometimes the connection between derivative and conventional
meanings 1s not obvious, or the derivative background has been
lost in antiquity.

Then there are meanings specific to a given branch of knowl-
edge which has its own terminology. Equally important is the con-

notation based on mental association that the speakers of Sanskrit
PROLOGUE 19
have with the word.?! And most importantly, the oral tradition has
preserved certain explanations, especially in the case of yoga, based
on the experience of the great masters.

It is for such reasons that different translations of the same text
read like different books. It is not that one translation is accurate
and another false. All the meanings express different levels of the
reality as expressed by a certain word. For example, again, the
word siitra does not mean either “something to sew with” or “a
thread.” Both ideas are conveyed together in the same word. When
the word is used to express a certain genre of texts, siitras, that
idea must also be included as the top level in that case.

Since in the minds of the speakers of Western languages such a
process of multilevel signification of words is now rare, it is natural
for an average English-speaking reader to assume that she or he
has to select from among the various translations of the same
word. Such is not the case. All the meanings of different levels of
the word must be seen and grasped simultaneously and as a single,
comprehensive whole. In translating Patafijali and Vyasa we have
attempted to conform to this view. Let us explain this approach
with an example. The first word of the Yoga-siitras is atha ‘now’.
Vyasa says:

Atha ‘now’—this word here has the purpose of indicating adhi-

AGra.
Now, adhikara means “authority,” “qualification” and “commence-
ment.” We take all these different meanings of the single word and
include them in one sentence as if there were several different
words in the original itself. Our translation then reads:

Atha ‘now’—this word here has the purpose of indicating author-

ity, qualification and commencement of the subyect matter.
21 Some readers might be under the erroneously created impression that Sanskrit ts a dead
language If that were so, the two thousand people who register Sanskrit as their first
language in the census of India must all be ghosts! In fact, Sanskrit 1s still the language of
traditionally learned assemblies, used to more or less a degree by hundreds of thousands of
people throughout that country, and 1s one of the fifteen official languages of India
20 INTRODUCTION: PART 1
All three words translating adhikara will be explained in our dis-
cussion, giving their background and implications.

In some places, after giving all the meanings of a word, we have
then taken those ideas together and coined a new term in English.
For example, the derivative meaning of the word asmita is “I-am-
ness” and this is explained in the discussion on Sitra I.8. But
thereafter we have settled on “composite sentience” because after
careful scrutiny of Siitras 1.17 and II.6 this appears to be the
philosophical intent and content of the Sanskrit term. A glossary
of terms is offered as an aid to the reader.

It is traditionally required of a commentator that the exposition
of a text include:

» Separating the original words of the text where they are combined

to form euphony (sandhi) and compounds
« Literal translation of words
Parsing (explaining the grammatical and syntactical form and
function) where relevant or helpful
« Rephrasing and exposition
«Answering challenges, refuting opposing opinions, eradicating
doubts
An attempt was made to remain true to this system throughout
without sacrificing comprehensibility to requirement. Frequently
the euphonized (sandhi) and compound words have been hyphen-
ated when used in our translations and discussions,22 but this is not
always the case; the hyphenated and unhyphenated forms are used
interchangeably.
There are six categories of siitras in various texts:
sanjfid: those that give a definition
Paribhdsha: those that give rules for the application of other
sitras
vidhi: those that enjoin an act
niyama: those that restrict or give injunction against an act
atidesha: those that present an analogy
22 In Sansknt, apposition of two sounds often Produces a third one. For example, yoga +
anushdsana = yoganushasana Such words have to be separated in accordance with complex
rules of what is known as sandhu.
PROLOGUE 21
adhikara or uddesha: those that state the subject of a text or a
portion thereof

These categories will be pointed out wherever it is relevant and
helpful. For example, the first sitra is an adhik@ra-sitra, stating
the topic of the text.

Regarding the use of various commentaries listed above, many
of them agree on some points in each siitra; some of them disagree.
Both agreements and disagreements are brought out by the discus-
sion where possible. When the interpretation of a commentator
differs from that of others without necessarily contradicting the
latter, such an interpretation is incorporated. For example, take
the following sentence in the discussion on Sitra 1.14:

How is it possible that a normally infirm and weak practice,
undertaken relatively recently (SS), will overpower the force of
these samsk4ras (VM, VB, NB, RY) which await to waylay one
(VM) and by which the practice is often blocked (VM, VB) and
constricted (RY)?
The source of each segment of the above sentence is cited. Because
our primary aim is lucidity, it is impossible in some places to see
with absolute accuracy just which word comes from which com-
mentator. In such doubtful places the scholar will naturally consult
the text and will know the approximate place where to look: Vid-
vamsas tatra prama@nam. The reader should also assume that where
no source is cited, the sentences and paragraphs have originated
with this author.

Finally, the work presented has been written intermittently be-
tween long periods of meditation and through the blessing, grace
and guidance of Shri-108 Swami Rama?} of the Himalayas. What-
ever is of truth here comes from the Guru lineage; whatever is
erroneous is mine.

23 In the traditions of India the word Shri wnitten 108 tis W@oteyaCpaméAaxsressis a
veneration implicit in such Western terms as “His Holiness
Part 2
Overview of Sankhya-yoga

The Yoga-sitras and the commentary being presented here
assume that the reader is familiar with Sankhya philosophy. With-
out such familiarity much of the terminology of the Yoga-sitras
will remain incomprehensible; hence this brief introduction to the
extensive field of Sankhya philosophy is essential and must be
provided within the total framework of Indian (non-Buddhist)
philosophy. One must first decide on a suitable approach to the
topic of Indian philosophy since there are several ways in which it
may be examined.

One way is that of a pedant bound to one of many philosophical
schools who refutes the views of all others and challenges them to
prove theirs right and his wrong. Most philosophers of the tradi-
tional schools fall into this category, having debated with all other
schools for thousands of years. Modern Western and westernized
Eastern scholars follow this trend and study each school of Indian
philosophy in isolation. It 1s not intended here to engage in a
dispute with them, because the separate schools of Indian philos-
ophy have indeed dominated the philosophical arena for these
millennia, each possessing its own closed system of internally con-
sistent values, doctrines and logical development (prati-tantra-
siddhanta). However, according to the Bhagavad-gita XVIII.22,
this approach 1s darkened knowledge (tamasic jfiadna).

Another approach is the way of that savant whose primary

23
24 INTRODUCTION: PART 2
interest is not in logical categories only but who seeks that wisdom
from which all logic begins and to which it must ultimately lead.
This is the way of reconciliation and resolution of conflicts (sama-
dhana), which eventually clears the pathway to samadhi. Such a
savant refuses to remain bound within a square or a cube. He must
understand the internally consistent logic of the system within a
given cube, no doubt, but he must also observe where the external
walls of one cube touch those of another; he must then enter the
other cube and understand the internally consistent logic of that
cube also. Thus, when he has looked at all the interconnected
cubes, he sees the whole picture which is based on one or more
common principles shared by all (sarva-tantra-siddhanta). This is
the way of active knowledge (rajasic jfiana) as defined in the
Bhagavad-gita XVII1.21.

Vastly improved on the way of that wisdom-seeking savant is
the way of the wise man, a person of intuitive vision and inspiration,
the yogi, who by first looking at the grand pattern sees all the
squares and cubes as well as all the spirals, circles and other pat-
terns. By understanding the grand pattern, the little geometric
shapes and forms are fully and effortlessly understood. The Bha-
gavad-gita XVI11.20 says this is the way of the pure, refined,
luminous knowledge (sattvic jfiana).

One who understands a large square
OVERVIEW OF SANKHYA-YOGA 25
with all its potentials (Shaktis) naturally understands all the smaller
squares contained in it
and all the triangles within it
as well as the relationships among all the smaller squares and
triangles and so forth.
26 INTRODUCTION: PART 2
Besides the established, narrow schools of philosophy there exist
in India widely taught ways of looking at philosophy such that all
the various schools may fit into a single, universal system. The
question arises: If all the schools do indeed fit into a single system,
why does each one have its own, separate list of categories of
reality with qualifications attached to each in such a way that it
cannot be compromised? The answer is that each system requires
an internal logic of its own. Each triangle within a square must
obey the laws of the triangle; in its relationship with the square it
must also follow the rules of that relationship, while the square
itself follows the laws governing a square but also permits the laws
of triangles to operate in the triangles which are within it. The
theoretical needs internal to each school are essential to that
school, but these needs do not invalidate and cannot be invalidated
by the larger philosophical picture. The rules of Euclidian mathe-
matics are not invalidated by quantum physics so far as they govern
the levels of reality where they are operable; in the realm of quantum

physics they are inoperable.

There does exist, therefore, a single system of Indian philosophy
which incorporates all the schools, assigning the categories of reality
from each into a total, universal scheme. This system is often
referred to as the Epic philosophy because it 1s expounded in that
vast text of many millions of verses called the Mahabharata and
eighteen Puranas and their numerous sub-Purdanas. These are epics
of Indian cosmology, viewing human events and laws within a
cosmic context. While the word Purana simply connotes “ancient”
legends, stories, philosophies and histories, these texts are often
misnamed “mythological” because they have regularly employed
the frame of a “myth” to give symbolic forms to that which would
otherwise remain formless. Hence there developed special schools
of philosophy such as Paficharatra that are almost exclusively
devoted to explaining the philosophical truths of the “mythic”
forms.

_The vast texts of the Epics and Puranas were composed by the
wise men and philosophers to serve as vehicles for simplified state-
OVERVIEW OF SANKHYA-YOGA 27
ments of truth regarding reality for the benefit of millions of non-
pedantic aspirants, to whom these are still read, sung or chanted
by pandits in village temples, royal palaces and suburban homes
alike. This is where the true philosophy of India lives and it is by
these texts that the Indian heart—as against its intellectual mind—
is really shaped.

To think that such philosophy is for millions of illiterate souls
alone is to misunderstand its intent, content and context. The
Bhagavad-gita is an example of the philosophical portions of the
Epics and Puranas. It is understood by many illiterate wise men
and women, yet not understood by those hundreds who have gained
their doctoral degrees by writing voluminous tomes about it. Great
Gcharyas, scholar-savants of many formal schools of philosophy,
have written commentaries on the Bhagavad-gita, each claiming it
supports his own school, because it shows that universal picture
within which each school of philosophy has its own internally valid
place.

Because yoga transcends all castes, belief systems, laws and
philosophies, the yogis—including those who cannot sign their
names as well as those who know the works of Shankaracharya by
heart—adhere more to this universal philosophy. Even if they are
especially learned in the doctrines of a single school of philosophy,
they teach their disciples an approach through synthesis (sarmanvaya)
because that alone, as we said earlier, leads to resolution of con-
flicts (samadhd@na) as both prerequisite to and conducive to samadhi.
The various schools are rungs (sopa@nas) of the selfsame ladder
which rises to the pinnacle of higher realization.

The Epics and the Puranas do not depict the universal, cosmo-
logical philosophy in a uniform way. There are various nuances,
preferences, subtle and not-so-subtle variations of schemes and
sequences of categories, depending on the predispositions of dif-
ferent teachers whose words are recorded in these texts. Here we
plan to provide that general picture which seems to be basically
agreed upon in most versions, especially selecting one in which
the Sankhya part of the scheme is closest to Sankhya-yoga as
28 INTRODUCTION: PART 2

propounded by Patafijali and Vyasa. In the scheme set forth by
this Epic philosophy, it will be seen that the categories accepted by
various schools are not only assigned their given places but that a
bridge is provided at transition points between one level of reality
and the next lower one. It is thus that the schools are connected to
one another. The following discussion illustrates the Epic philos-
ophy technique.

Vedanta School

There is a single Transcendental Reality (Brahman) whose nature
is Existence (sat), Consciousness (chit) and Bliss (@nanda). This is
the Self (parama-atman) of all that is. Its inherent potency (Shakti),
which makes It omnipotent, is called maya, with the twofold power
to veil and to unveil. It is Brahman’s very nature (Prakrti) dwelling
eternally in It, containing all possible aspects.

Transition

The relationship of this One Principle with the dualities and
multiplicities of the universe is discussed by many dcharyas, each
qualifying this relationship according to his own understanding
and view.

In the syncretic philosophy of the Epics and Puranas, mdyd,
which is the very nature (Prakrti) of Brahman, now projects its
power of unveiling all the uncountable, unmanifest, formerly veiled
aspects or Shaktis of Brahman.! It then divides into two. In this
division the Bliss principle, which can be associated with undivided
One Perfection only, 1s eclipsed.

+The Consciousness Principle coupled with Existence becomes

purusha, and

«The Existence Principle, without consciousness, becomes prakrt:

(not to be confused with Brahman’s Perfect Nature, called Its
Prakrti, with a capital P).
ed See emming from Brahman has been discussed in some detail in
and Philosophy, 1979) ale, Pa Himalayan International Institute of Yoga Science
OVERVIEW OF SANKHYA-YOGA 29
Sankhya School
There are two eternally coexistent principles:

purusha: the conscious spiritual-energy principle

prakyti: the unconscious material-energy principle
Purusha, again, may be a God of the universe (in theistic Sankhya,
which is the normally accepted philosophy of the Epics and
Puranas as well as the Yoga-siitras), who may again subdivide into
the Holy Trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the Preserver)
and Shiva (the Dissolver) and, further, into their various aspects
and sparks that may incarnate, become flesh, to give knowledge to
and confer saving grace upon

purushas, the numerous entities of consciousness,

who become

Jivas, souls, when they assume a connection with prakyti.

The purusha principle is ever-pure, ever-wise, ever-free. It is that
self (G@tmman) which never comes into the trap of ignorance and
bondage. It is only prakrti, activated like a magnet, that comes
into association with purusha and receives his rays.

Prakrti is the unmanifest, intangible, subtlest origin of what
later becomes tangible matter. Prakyti consists of the equilibrium
of three gunas (attributes):

Sativa: luminosity, purity, hghtness, harmony, producing pleasure

rajas: activity, energy, movement, producing pain

tamas: dullness, inertia, darkness, stasis, producing stupor
So long as the three gunas remain in perfect equilibrium, there is
no universe. Only as disequilibrium occurs are the various phe-
nomena called vikaras or vikrtis, modifications or evolutes, pro-
duced.

Sankhya believes in a theory of causation called sat-karya-vada
whereby objects are not something new produced from any quanta
30 INTRODUCTION: PART 2

other than those inherent in their causes. Nothing new is created;
only the energies change form. Nothing is destroyed, either. Every
clay pot exists within clay, every sculpture in marble, every ice
cube in water. The special attributes of a cause become manifest
and tangible, given certain innate propensities of nature. Thus what
lay unmanifest within prakrti becomes manifest in its product
(vikrti), the phenomenal universe, with all the evolutes or products
within it.

All evolutes carry within themselves all three gunas; nothing
exists that does not include all the three gunas together. Variances
in the nature of all phenomena, entities, attributes, self-identifica-
tions, tendencies and inclinations, choices, personalities, relation-
ships and acts depend on the dominance and preponderance of
gunas. For example, where sattva dominates and is served by rajas
and tamas, the manifestation appears predominantly sattvic. In
that manifestation

Sattva’ provides refined, pure, luminous qualities;

rajas: energizes, impels, overcoming stagnation; and

tamas: stabilises.
But where tamas dominates,

tamas. causes stagnation and dullness;

rajas: struggles to change the status quo,

sattva: remains dormant, waiting to be energized with the help

of rajas

This explanation ts by no means exhaustive, but provides examples
of an interdependence among gunas. Rayas provides constant oscil-
lation and sattva and tamas produce a pull, each in its own direc-
tion, seeking to be dominant. The natures and acts of objects,
phenomena and entities change as the equilibrium or balance of
forces among the inherent gunas undergoes any alteration. The
most dynamic can become static and the most static may become
dynamic. Rocks may release gases; gases may become caught in
OVERVIEW OF SANKHYA-YOGA 31
rocks. Hydrogen may gather more particles and ultimately become
uranium, which may radiate out its particles and eventually return
to hydrogen. Food may provide sattvic energy or may sit as tam-
asic heaviness in the stomach and may then need the rajas of
digestive spices, herbs or potions to impel it in some direction. A
marriage may be pleasant (sattvic) and stable (served by tamas) or
volatile (rajasic) or so stagnant (tamasic) that not even a quarrel
occurs. For a more detailed understanding of the natures of the
three gunas it is strongly recommended that the reader study
Chapters XIV, XVII and XVIII of the Bhagavad-gita.

Now, back to prakrti. The first unmanifest prakrti is, of course,
the origin of all phenomena. It is not in itself a change in anything
prior. But its evolutes or products are its

vikrti: modifications, products, evolutes,

and yet also

prakrtt: origins of further evolutes.
Milk (like prakrti) undergoes a change and produces cream (a
vikrti), which is in turn transformed into butter. These intermediate
phenomena, like cream, which are both (a) products or effects of
an earlier cause, and (b) producers or origins of a future effect are
called

prakru-vikrtt' modifications that may be modified further
Only the final products which cannot be modified further are strictly
called wikrti, the ultrmate modifications or transformations. How-
ever, the term vikrti ‘modification’ 1s also quite frequently used for
prakru-vikrtis, which are the modifiable modifications. There are a
total of twenty-three such wkrtis produced from the original prakrti
or material-energy principle. Thus there are

1 prakrti
2-24. vikrtis, twenty-three evolutes
25 purusha, numerous conscious entities which become jivas
(souls)
26. purusha, the God
32. INTRODUCTION: PART2

making a total of twenty-six principles or categories in the Epic
Sankhya, also accepted in the Yoga-siitras. Our concern here, how-
ever, is not with God but with the permutation (sarikhydna, because
of which this system is called Sankhya) of the other twenty-five so
that

the self (purusha) and

the non-self (prakrti together with its 23 evolutes)
may be known as separate. This discrimination (pra-sankhydana,
because of which also this system is called Sankhya) alone between
the spiritual energy-self (purusha) and the non-spiritual material
energy (prakrti) together with its evolutes eliminates pain. Other-
wise pain remains a fact for all entities as a principle inhered
through the rajas component.

In order to develop discrimination (pra-sankhyGna) (a) as a pur-
suit to eliminate all pain permanently and totally, and (5) to attain
self-realization, it is essential that all the components constituting
the non-self, material, parts of the sentient (that is, living and
conscious) entity must be enumerated and understood. But the
material adjuncts of a sentient entity do not exist in isolation from
their counterparts in the universe. The two have to be understood
as a single phenomenon. Hence, one studies the chains of universal
causations

Since purusha is ever-pure, ever-wise, ever-free, he is unmodi-
fiable, no change or transformation occurs in him; he is never
ignorant, never in pain or bondage and therefore there 1s no ques-
tion of his enlightenment or release. Any observation or discussion
of changes pertains to prakrti alone. Let us, therefore, look further
at the modifications of prakrti. Only a small part of prakrti is at
any time undergoing the phenomenalization. The rest remains in
unmanifest nature. The first evolute of prakrti is

mahat the Great, the Magnum
OVERVIEW OF SANKHYA-YOGA 33
Mahat is the most sattvic, finest and purest product of prakrti. On
one hand it is that first disequilibrium of gunas in which no other
form or shape yet emerges. It is simply a presence, the subtle
energy which will produce objects. It is also the universal buddhi,
the faculty of discrimination which serves as a vehicle of purusha’s
consciousness. Because it is the most sattvic modification, it is fit
to serve as a medium between purusha and the grosser material
phenomena. A small spark of the universal mahat is also the indi-
vidual buddhi, the faculty of discrimination, intelligence and intel-
lection in a sentient entity.
From mahat, the next evolute to appear is
ahamkara: ego, the I-maker
It is not to be confused with ego as pride. It is the state in which
any self-identification begins; names and forms appear. It is here
that intelligence begins to identify itself as differentiated, “this but
not that.” Here the process of creation begins to diversify into
subjective and objective branches. The sattvic aharnkara produces
the subjective branch, namely
«mind
five cognitive senses (to cognize sound, touch, form, taste, smell)
«five active senses (to speak, act, move, procreate and eliminate)
The tamasic aharhkara produces the objective branch, namely
etive ran-mdtrads (subtle elements of or potentials for audibility,
tangibility, visibility, flayour and odour)
which in turn “solidify” and produce
etive bhdtas or tativas (the physical states of matter earth or solid,
water or liquid, fire or light that 15 combustive and iluminative, air
or gascous, and space, which is not a vacuum but a state of matter)
Let us see these as a chart (p. 34)
34 INTRODUCTION: PART 2
prakyti
1. mahat or buddhi faculty of discrimination,
intelligence or intellection;
the first vehicle of purusha
2. aharhkara ego, the principle of self-
UN identification
(sattvic) (tamasic)
rajasic
aharhkira
impelling both
mind
3-13. } 5 cognitive senses
5 active senses
14-18. 5 subtle elements
(tan-matras) /
19-23 5 gross elements
(bhiitas or tattvas).
earth, water,
fire, air, space
OVERVIEW OF SANKHYA-YOGA 35
Yoga-siitra 11.19 gives alternative explanatory titles as follows:
prakrti } a-linga, without a distinguishing
mark
1. mahat } shemare merely a mark but
with no distinguishing features

2-7. aharhkara and ser general, non-specific,

5 tan-matras intermediate links between mahat
(subtle elements) and the final 16 products
8-23. mind and |
5 cognitive senses
5 active senses visheshas, specific, final 16 products
5 bhiitas (gross
elements)

Each of these evolutes submerges into the immediately preceding
cause from which it has emerged; finally all phenomena dissolve
into prakrti. These cycles of creations and dissolutions, because of
the inherent nature of prakrti, are endless.

The twenty-three evolutes, of which the universe is constituted
and which also form our personalities, are all non-self. Intelligence
or faculty of discrimination, through ego and mind and all their
attendant cognitions, volitions, inclinations, emotions and so forth,
all the senses as well as what they sense, the components as well as
the states of the physical body too—they are all non-self. Only
purusha, the spiritual-energy principle, is the self. This realization
alone eradicates all pain permanently and totally. This alone is
final freedom.
36 INTRODUCTION: PART2
Nyaya-Vaisheshika School

At the point where Sankhya leaves off, the Vaisheshika system
picks up. It concerns itself with five of the visheshas, namely the
five gross elements or states of matter. At this point creation be-
comes atomic. The earliest masters defined this finest particle as
having no mass but being merely a point in space. Conjunctions of
these points later produce mass. The Vaisheshika system, together
with Ny4ya, is thus atomistic. It is from Vaisheshika that all physical
sciences in India, such as alchemy, chemistry, pharmaceutics,
branched off.

The Vaisheshika system is concerned with the physical properties
of matter and how the self and mind use those properties. Hence it
takes into account only nine substances (dravyas):

1-5. five gross elements (listed as the final vikrtis in Sankhya;
5 of the visheshas in the Yoga-siitras)

6. time (kala)

7. dimension (atk)

8. mind (manas)

9. self (Atman)
The Vaisheshika system’s definition of 4tman is based on how its
attributes manifest themselves while it 1s “bound” to the physical
universe. In association with an atomic universe, it is seen as an
anu, minute like an atom, featuring certain symptoms of its pres-
ence in the physical body. These symptoms are desire, aversion,
effort, pleasure, pain and knowledge. When “freedom” from physical
phenomena occurs, these symptoms cease. Vaisheshika is inhibited
from going any further. The later Nydya interpreters misunder-
stood 4tman in freedom as without action or knowledge!

How 1s it possible for the body-bound atman to liberate itself? It
must practise that which enhances its betterment in this hfe (abhyu-
daya) and in the next (mih-Shreyasa). This 1s to be arrived at by
following the teachings of the inspired scriptures (in Vaigheshika)
and in addition by using the mind clearly, that is, by reasoning
correctly according to the system of logic (Nyaya). This is all that
is within the capacity of a delimited being, until the final yoga is
OVERVIEW OF SANKHYA-YOGA 37
reached, which is agreed to but beyond the realm of the boundaries
demarcated for this school.

Later Nyaya-Vaisheshika philosophers were the chief proponents
of the existence of God in centuries-long debates against the Bud-
dhists. Their arguments are remarkably similar to those of Christian
theologians who revived Aristotelian logic in the West.

Mimamsa School

While the Vaisheshikas experimented with physical properties of
matter and Nyaya philosophers established the principles of logic
and correct reasoning as ramparts to safeguard against ignorance,
the Mimams4 philosophers developed two areas which were also
agreed to as important in Nyaya-Vaigsheshika. These are (a) the
nature of revealed knowledge (Veda); and (4) the principles govern-
ing correct action. Complex theories and debates thereupon devel-
oped within the Mimarmhsa school and gave much impetus to the
evolution of Indian ethics and laws and rules of social interaction.
These rules must remain in force for the people in whom the
presence of a pure self can only be surmised while mainly the
impure mental and physical instrumentation exhibits desires, aver-
sions, and so forth, which lead to an accumulation of karmas, an
attempt to understand which is another primary occupation of the
mimamsakas.

Sankhya-yoga School

The system of Patafiyali takes into account all the concerns of
Sankhya, Nyadya, Vaisheshika and Mimamsa. All twenty-six San-
khya categories are employed in this philosophy. Pramdna, or valid
proof, is defined much as in Nydya. The scriptural authority is
accepted as valid. Visheshas of the Vaisheshika school are con-
sidered the end-product of an evolution of reality. Time is discussed
and clearly defined in YS IV, although its status is at best obscure
in much of Sankhya. The codes of conduct are especially important
in the Yoga-sitras as the first two of the eight angas ‘limbs’, namely
the samas and niyamas.

However, granting validity to all the schemes of Sankhya and so
38 INTRODUCTION: PART 2

forth, the only question that is of interest to Patafijali is: So what?
What are the practical implications of all the experimenting (Vaishe-
shika), reasoning (Nyaya), categorizing (Sankhya) or studying in-
spired scriptures (Mimarhs4)? How may one finally see and expe-
rience that self and non-self are indeed ever-separate and that the
self is ever-pure, ever-wise and ever-free? To this end Sankhya-
yoga (a) borrows from other systems what needs to be borrowed,
and (b) adds an original theory wherever one needs to be added.
Primarily it takes the Sankhya theory of causation and applies it
to understanding the states of mind. The modifications (vikrtis) of
mind are its vrttis, all the mental fluctuations. These must be dis-
solved into their origin. What is /aya or prati-safichara (dissolution
of the universe and its phenomena) in Sankhya becomes in the
Yoga-sittras respectively nirodha or prati-prasava (dissolution of
the vyttis and gunas manifest therein). This can happen only in the
practice of samadhi.

An average reader of Sankhya sees the evolutes or vikrtis of
prakrti in the context of cosmogony, the cycles of creations and
dissolutions of universes. In Sankhya-yoga, that is, in the Yoga-
Siitras, these evolutes are of interest only with regard to the material
accretions around the individual purusha. They are his personal
matter (pun intended). Everything from buddhi (mahat) and ego
(ahamhkara) to mind, senses and the body are this personal matter.
The yogi needs to know their origin and creation only so as to
dissolve them, that is, dissolve purusha’s association with them in
the process of samadhi.

To facilitate an understanding of the practical processes leading
to samadhi, the Yoga-siitras have to employ a terminology and
definitions of the evolutes a little differently from that of Sankhya.
For example, Sankhya discusses mahat but not asmita. In the
Yoga-siitras, it is in asmita that the impression of a union between
purusha and prakrti, between self and non-self, between the con-
scious and the unconscious, first occurs.

asmita: that process in which mahat or buddhi, being the purest
and most sattvic evolute of prakrti, becomes a recipient of a
reflection of the conscious light of purusha.
OVERVIEW OF SANKHYA-YOGA 39
It is the union of a crystal mirror with a reflection of the sun.
Purusha, like the distant sun in the sky, remains unaffected by the
union of its reflection with the mirror, but all the processes of the
composite personality begin. Consciousness and life in us flows
through this asmitd, which lends to ego and to mind a semblance
of awareness.

All through the practical processes of yoga, the reverse begins to
occur, a withdrawal, a dissolution of vrttis, a burning of past
samskaras, the final sundering between the two components of
asmita. Then prakrti is prakrti. Purusha is purusha. And the twain
shall never meet even as they have never met before.

Where does prakrti go thereafter? What are its connections with
maya again? In what consciousness does purusha dwell then? The
Yoga-siitras take one to the verge, and from there let the experience
itself answer. The Epic philosophers say with Vedanta that purusha
merges into Brahman—but that is another school. The final goal
of the Yoga-siitras is kaivalya, isolation of purusha. Perhaps it is a
transition to the same state as kifastham: the unmodifiable, immut-
able, unchangeable Brahman. The Epic philosophers agree. The
Yoga-siitras, having done the work of providing practical guidance
that leads to kaivalya, remain mute.

The Vedantins identify Kapila, the first founder of Sankhya,
with Hiranya-garbha (as seen in Shankaracharya’s Bhashya on
Shvetashvatara Upanishad V.2). Shankaracharyas up to this day
bear the title Sankhya-trayi-pratipalaka ‘Guardian of the Threefold
Sankhya’.

GLORY TO ALL SAINTS.
HOMAGE TO ALL GURUS.
Part 3
Tattva-samasa-siitras
(Paraphrased)

The Tattva-samasa-sitras comprise an ancient text said to have
been taught by Kapila, the founder of Sankhya philosophy, to his
immediate disciple, Asuri. In other words, TSS forms the very first
text of the formal Sankhya system of philosophy, stating all its

categories and tenets.
Tattva-samasa-sitras
TSS 1. atha atas tattva-samasah
Now the summary of the categories of reality according to the
Sankhya philosophy.
TSS 2. ashtau prakrtayah
prakrtis, eight origins of evolutes:
prakrti; the equilibrium of three gunas, itself not
evolved from any other origin, but the primor-
dial source of all other evolutes
8 prakrtis buddhi; faculty of discrimination, intelligence
ahamkara; ego, identifying principle
tan-matras; five subtle elements of sound, touch,
form, flavour and smell
(Buddhi, aharnkara and the tan-mdatrdas are evolved from prakrti
and are origins of other evolutes as well.)
TSS 3. shodasha vikarah
vikaras or vikrtis, sixteen evolutes:
41
42 INTRODUCTION: PART 3
indriyas; eleven senses, as follows: mind, five cognitive senses,
five active senses
bhiitas or tattvas; five gross elements: space, air, fire, water,
earth (evolved in that order)
(Buddhi, ahamkara, the five tan-m@trds, the eleven indriyas,
and the five bhatas or tattvas constitute twenty-three evolutes
of prakrti.)
TSS 4. purushah
purusha: The conscious principle, ever-pure, ever-wise, ever-free:
- Souls in non-theistic Sankhya
- Souls and God in theistic Sankhya
TSS 5. traigunyam
Three gunas: sattva, rajas, tamas. (For an explanation see BhG
chaps. XIV, XVII, XVIII.) Three attributes of prakrti, which
are in equilibrium before the creation of evolutes. The three
attributes represent the principles of illumination, activity and
stasis. Their disequilibrium in various proportions produces
the evolutes.
TSS 6. saficharah
There is a chain of transitions from non-evolute prakrt1 towards
the evolutes, ending at the grossest evolute, the solids (earth).
TSS 7. prati-saficharah
There is also a chain of reverse transition from evolutes towards
dissolution into prakrti.
TSS 8. adhyatmam-adhibhitam-adhidaivam
adhyatma: the categories under direct control of the spiritual
self (purusha or atman):
Mental:
mahat or buddh1, intelligence
ahamkara, ego
manas, mind
Physical:
Five cognitive senses
Five active senses
TATTVA-SAMASA-SOTRAS 43
adhibhita: attributes of the objects of experience, such as
the intelligible,
the identifiable,
the thinkable,
the sounds heard, etc.
Corresponding to the adhydtma categories, but dwelling in
the objects of experience.
adhidaiva: relating to the celestial and subtle worlds, conscious
powers of nature, angelic beings, planetary deities, etc.
TSS 9. paficha abhi-buddhayah
Five activities of intelligence:
abhibuddhi: “I must do this”
abhimana: “I do this”
ichchha: desire, want
kartavyata: indulgence of the cognitive senses
kriya: operations of the active senses
(There are also alternative explanations in various commen-
taries.)
TSS 10. paficha karma-yonayah
Five causes and results of action:
dhrti: resolution of mind, speech and action
Shraddha: inclinations of faith: generosity of mind, celibacy,
charity, acts of prayer
sukha: acts undertaken with prayer or expectation of a com-
forting or pleasant result
a-vividhisha: the tendency that blocks the desire for knowledge
vividisha: desire to know matters relating to spirituality,
especially the conscious principle
TSS 11. paficha vayavah
Five pra@nas: prana, apdna, samana, udana, vyana
The five fields of vital energy in the person.
TSS 12. paficha karma@tmanah
Five types of living beings with regard to their actions:
44. INTRODUCTION: PART 3
vaikarika: with sattvic ego, naturally inclined to perform
good deeds
taijasa: with rajasic ego, naturally inclined to perform evil
acts
bhatadi: with tamasic ego, performing acts of stupefaction;
these are of two types:
sanumana: performing good acts of stupefaction
niranumana: performing evil acts of stupefaction
(The four sttras which follow [TSS 13-16] enumerate fifty modi-
fications of intelligence.)
TSS 13. paficha-parva avidya
Five kinds of ignorance (viparyayas or kleshas in the Yoga-
siitras), also known as the five major hells:
avidya: ignorance
- mistaking the eternal for the non-eternal,
mistaking the non-eternal for the eternal;
+ mistaking the pure for the impure,
mistaking the impure for the pure;
- mistaking pleasure for pain,
mistaking pain for pleasure;
« mistaking the self for the non-self,
mistaking the non-self for the self.
asmita@: \-am-ness
rdga: attraction
dvesha. aversion
abhinivesha: fear of death, that “May I not cease to be”
(These five kinds of ignorance have a total of sixty-two sub-
divisions.)
TSS 14. ashtavimshatidha ashaktih
aShaktt, twenty-eight kinds of incapacity:
- Incapacities N.
of mind |
of five cognitive senses 5
of five active senses 5
Subtotal NV 11
- Incapacities of intelligence AZ
Total N 28
TATTVA-SAMASA-SOTRAS 45

The incapacities of intelligence are explained as various

possible false views held concerning the nature of the cate-

gories of reality. These are the opposites of the nine tushtis

and eight siddhis of TSS 15-16.

TSS 15. navadha tushtih
tushtis, nine complacencies (four spiritual and five external):
- Four spiritual complacencies:

- Matter will give me realization.

- Renunciation will give me realization.

¢ Time will bring forth realization.

- Destiny and luck will give me realization.

- Five external complacencies, based on five steps of dispas-
sion (vairdgya):

« The ways of earning wealth are violent, exploitative and
painful.

« Guarding wealth and the sources of pleasure is painful.

« Wealth, luxury and pleasure, even well-guarded, are
temporary; there is no permanency of feeling of security
about them.

- No matter how many objects of senses one enjoys, there
is no satisfaction, and the desires blaze evermore.

- It is not possible to enjoy oneself without hurting other
beings.

TSS 16. ashtadha siddhih
siddhis, eight accomplishments (not to be confused with the
siddhis of yoga):
¢ Three primary siddhis:

-« Removal of the three kinds of suffering (see TSS 23)

- Five secondary siddhis (the means to the three primary
ones):

« Contemplation with a logical mental process

« Knowledge gained from words and from authoritative
scriptures

- Study

- Gaining (noble) friends, that is, guru, disciples, co-
seekers, with whom one may discuss spiritual matters

¢ Self-purification
46 INTRODUCTION: PART 3
TSS 17. dasha milika-arthah
miilika-arthas, ten fundamental tenets of Sankhya philosophy:
« There is a conscious self; there is an original, unmanifest
nature, prakrti.
« There is a single, unmanifest cause of all material objects,
namely, prakrti.
« The conscious self exists for no other one.
- Matter exists for serving the conscious self.
+ The conscious self is separate and different from the
unconscious prakrti and its evolutes.
- The conscious self is mot an agent of actions.
« Union of matter with spiritual self occurs.
« Separation of matter from spiritual self occurs.
- There are many purushas, conscious selves.
- After total self-realization the body may continue by the
momentum of its own laws.
(The fifty modifications of intelligence [TSS 13-16] and the ten
fundamentals [TSS 17] constitute the sixty factors discussed in
the ancient Shashti-tantra, ‘The Book of Sixty’.)
TSS 18. anugraha-sargah
Fivefold compassionate creation:
- The five subtle elements (tan-mdatras) (see TSS 2)
« Also, the appearance of divine, incarnate sages 1s considered
compassionate creation.
TSS 19. chaturdaShavidho bhita-sargah
Fourteen kinds of living species of this and subtler or celestial
worlds (the list is irrelevant and not exhaustive).
TSS 20. trividho bandhah
Three kinds of bondage:
prakrtika bandha: identifying the self with the eight prakrtis
(enumerated in TSS 2)
vaikrtika bandha: renunciates becoming attracted to objects
of pleasure
dakshina bandha: (1) common worldly people’s involvement
with ordinary desires and needs of life; (2) an ascetic’s
dependence on the offerings of laymen
TATTVA-SAMASA-SUTRAS 47
TSS 21. trividho mokshah
moksha, three kinds of liberation:
« Arising from the full expansion of knowledge
- Arising from the elimination of attachments
- Arising above good and evil, when the self has abandoned
all prakrtic identifications
TSS 22. trividham pramanam
pramanas, three valid proofs:
- Direct perception
- Inference
- Authority of realized ones and their revealed scriptures
TSS 23. trividharh duhkham
duhkha, three kinds of pain:
Gdhyatmika: intrapersonal; to be cured by internal means:
«mental, such as desire, passion, jealousy, greed, fear,
depression, etc.; of these,
the antidote to passion is control
the antidote to anger is compassion
the antidote to attachment is self-analysis
the antidote to fear is wisdom about the true nature of
categories (evolutes)
the antidote to jealousy is generosity and magnanimity
the antidote to depression is non-attachment
+» physical, the imbalance of humours
adhibhautika: caused through the agency of other beings
adhidaivika: caused through the agency of natural forces
and the conscious powers of the subtler worlds
TSS 24. etat paramparaya yathatathyam
This is the order as it is taught in the Tradition.
TSS 25. etat sarvam jfiadtva krta-krtyah syat na punas trividhena
duhkhena abhi-bhiyate.
Knowing it all, one fulfils himself;
Then one is not overcome by the three kinds of pain.
Yoga-sititras
Chapter One
Samadhi-pada
(Chapter on Samadhi)
Compendium of
— - 9 =
Sutras and Vyasa’s Bhashya
Chapter One
Sitra Page
STATEMENT (UDDESHA)
1. Commencing the Teaching of Yoga 57
*Yoga is samadhi
Five states of mind
Effects of samadhi
Two levels of samadhi
DEFINITIONS (NIRDESHA)
2. Definition of Yoga 93
Samprajfidta also is yoga
Three natures of mind: three gunas
Natures and inclinations of personalities according to
their guna compositions
Nature of consciousness
Discriminating wisdom 1s the lesser goal, seedless
samadh1 is the final goal
3. Definition of Yoga Continued; Consciousness in
Asamprajfiata 114
Consciousness in worldly inv olw@@eNTi_onlyan
appearance
* The indented portions of this compendium indicateaapagcone niyo yaragyggnas/ia
52, COMPENDIUM
4. Consciousness in Worldly Involvements 122
Relationship between chitta and purusha
CHITTA-VRTTI AND NIRODHA
5. Fivefold Vrttis, Afflicted and Unafflicted 135
Cycle of vyttis and sarhskaras
Final dissolution of chitta
6. Vrttis Enumerated 148
7. Three Valid Proofs (Pramanas) 149
Direct perception (pratyaksha) determines the specific
Inference (anumd@na) determines the general and
homogeneous
Nature of revealed authority (agama)
8. Perversive Cognition (Viparyaya) 162
Why perversive cognition is not valid
It is identical to the five afflictions (k/eshas)
9. Imaginary Cognition (Vikalpa) 171
Philosophical errors
Examples of such errors
10. Sleep (Nidra) 178
Why sleep is a vrtti
Three kinds of sleep
Why it must be controlled
11. Memory (Smrti) 185
What does the chitta remember?
Relationship of buddhi and memory
Two kinds of memory
Why vrttis must be brought to nirodha
THE TWO MEANS
12. Nirodha by Practice (Abhya@sa) and Dispassion
(Vairagya) 193
The flow of mind-stream in two directions
Abhydsa and vairagya channelising in both
13. Definition of Practice (Abhydsa) 198
Zeal in practice
COMPENDIUM 53
14. How Practice Becomes Firm of Ground 202
By asceticism, celibacy, knowledge and faith
15. Dispassion (Vairagya) Defined 205
Craving must be conquered
Stages of vairdgya
16. Transcendent Vairagya 212
Lower vairdgya and higher vairagya
Effects of the transcendent vairdgya:
first, freedom from cycles of birth and death
second, ultimate knowledge and kaivalya
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY YOGA
17. Four Levels of Samprajfiata Samadhi (Secondary
Yoga) 218
Explained; these samadhis need objects of
concentration
18. Asamprajfiata Samadhi (Primary Yoga) 248
Free of all vrttis
Achieved through transcendent vairdgya
Without objects of concentration
Seedless
19. Bhava-pratyaya Samadhi (Secondary Yoga) 256
Videhas enjoying the subtle world of sarnskaras
Prakrti-layas enjoying prakrti in equilibrium
Both mistaking their state to be kaivalya
UPAYAS: METHODS
20. Five Methods 264
Faith 1s like a loving mother
Sequence in achieving success in the methods
21-22. How Quickly Yogis of What Strength Gain
Their Goal 271
AN EASY METHOD
23. Practising the Presence of God 277
The easy way of grace, simply by turning one’s
awareness to God
54 COMPENDIUM
24. Who Is God? 282
Afflictions, actions, fruitions erroneously attributed to
God
How God is unique, different from those who have
achieved liberation
Relationship of God and the Scriptures
Only one God
25. Seed of the Omniscient 295
Knowledge in the lesser beings is seed of the
omniscient
Where knowledge reaches unexcelled perfection, that
is God
God’s purpose in imparting knowledge is to confer
grace eternally in all creations
26. Guru of the Most Ancient Ones 305
He is not delimited by past or future
27. OM Signifies God 309
Relationship of OM with God, not only the signifier
and the signified but an eternal relationship
28. Recitation (Japa) of OM 315
Contemplating God with yapa
Japa helps accomplish the “sitting”
Then the Supreme Self shines forth
29 Then Inward Consciousness Develops and
Obstacles Are Annulled 320
This is the result of the practice of the presence of
God
Self-realization also accrues
OBSTACLES AND THEIR CORRELATES
30. Nine Obstacles (Antardyas) or Distractions
(Vikshepas) 324
Defining the nine obstacles
31. Five Correlates of Antarayas 329
Defining the five correlates
They do not occur in a mind that has reached
samadhi
COMPENDIUM 55
OVERCOMING OBSTACLES: METHODS FOR
PURIFYING AND STABILISING THE MIND
32. Practice of One Reality to Overcome Antardyas 333
Refuting the view that mind is only momentary
Establishing that one continuous mind has many
objects
33. Four Purificatories for the Mind 340
Explaining the four
Then the mind becomes clear, pleasant, stabilised
34. Controlled, Slow, Smooth Breathing 346
Stabilising the mind through awareness of controlled
breath
35. Experience of Subtle Celestial Elements 350
What concentrations lead to which experiences
Stabilising the mind through these
Purpose of these experiences: to strengthen faith and
to increase mind’s capacities, leading to perfection
of five methods
36. Light of Buddhi (Jyotishmati) 355
Concentration in heart lotus
Experience of lights of various kinds
Experience of brilliant vast space
l-am-ness as oceanic consciousness
Jyotishmati of two kinds. vishokd and
asmua-matra
Stabilises the mind
37. Muiund-field Attuned to Sages 359
Becomes stabilised
38. Knowledge of Dream and Sleep States 361
Stabilises the mind
39. Freedom in Choosing the Objects of
Concentration 365
The mind concentrated on any object of one’s
inclination will form the habit of becoming
stabilised
56 COMPENDIUM
40. Highest Control (Vashikdra) over the Subtlest and
the Vastest 368
Then the mind needs no further purificatories
SAMAPATTIS: COALESCENCES AND SAMADHIS
41. Defining Coalescence (Samdpatti) 371
Analogy of objects reflecting in crystal is like mind’s
coalescence with:
the objects apprehended (grahya)
the instrument of apprehension (grahana)
the apprehender (grahitr)
42. Vitarka-accompanied Coalescence 380
Confusions of word, object and knowledge
They alternate in this lower coalescence
43. Nir-vitarka Coalescence 387
Devoid of former confusion and alternations
Mind-field totally coalescing with objects of
apprehension
Unitary knowledge, not dwelling on parts, even
atomic ones
How objects gain a self-nature
Refuting the view that there 1s no “whole” consisting
of parts
44. Sa-vichadra and Nir-vichara Coalescences 399
Respectively, accompanied with and not accompanied
with the delimitations of time, space, causation
Dwelling on subtle aspects of elements and subtle
objects; unitary experience
Realization as though mind devoid of its own nature
45 The “Subtle” Extends up to Prakrti, Which Has
No Marks 404
The degrees of the “subtle”; finally the subtlest is
prakrti.
Is not purusha the subtlest?
46 Samadhis with Seed 409
Lower coalescences have objects of concentration as
seeds of sarhskdras
COMPENDIUM 57
47. Proficiency in Nir-vichdra 41
Total purification leads to spiritual clarity
Then the yogi no longer suffers but is compassionate
towards suffering beings
48. Truth-bearing Wisdom 414
Three ways to wisdom
49. Truth-bearing Wisdom Is Unique 416
Knowledge from scriptures or logic gives no
realization of the specifics
The higher knowledge is not gained from worldly
direct perception
That no external proof can test it is no refutation of
higher knowledge
50. Sarhskaras of Samadhi-wisdom Counteract
Other Samskaras 419
Reversing the cycle of vrttis and worldly sarhskaras
Cycle of samadhi-wisdom, its sarnskaras and samadhi-
wisdom again
Would these samskdras not empower the mind?
When realization is reached, the mind has no more
function
51. Seedless Samadhi 424
It occurs when even the sarhskaras of samadhi-
wisdom are countered
State of nirodha in asamprajfiata is inferred only
afterwards by seeing the time elapsed
Nirodha-samskaras do not nurture the mind’s power,
which 1s then dissolved, together with all samskaras
When the mind 1s withdrawn, purusha then dwells in
his own nature
Introduction to Sutra 1.1
aria Perven waa arat wet wrdteed & Feat
arswate ft wat ata carats weeaterersrarsrer |

yogena chittasya padena vacham,
malam Ssharirasya cha vaidyakena;
yo pakarot tam pravaram muninam,
patanijalim prafijalir Gnato’smi
He who removed the impurities
of the mind by (the teaching of) yoga,
of speech by (his exposition of) grammar, and
of the body by (composing his treatise on) the science
of medicine,
unto that doyen of sages
1 bow with joined hands.*
Our homage to Shesha,
the snake of eternal kundalimi,
the residue that remains
after the great dissolution,
the one who incarnates again and again
to teach the science of yoga.
* This verse 1s often cited by authors on yoga, although its orginal source is uncertain
59
60 SOTRAILI
In the mythologies of India, which are mostly parables for ex-
plaining deeper philosophical truths, it is believed that Vishnu,
God as Preserver, gathers the universe unto Himself at the end of
an aeon and sleeps on the ocean of cosmic milk—an idea compar-
able to the poetic notion of the Milky Way—on the curled-up
snake of eternity known as Shesha, the Residue. A legend says that
Patafijali was an incarnation of Shesha, and that at the end of his
life he was seen being swallowed by a python. We believe that the
greatest teacher of yoga, indeed, can be no other than a master of
the snake called kundalini, which is, in fact, the snake of eternity,
the residue that remains after the material consciousness is dissolved.
Although it is uncertain whether the verse is authentically Vydsa’s
own composition, we have paraphrased the homage paid in the
beginning of some manuscripts of Vyasa’s commentary. Other com-
mentators, following the Indian tradition, all begin their commen-
taries with prayer verses which are neither translated nor para-
phrased here.
According to the Indian tradition of textual criticism, the subject
matter of a text must include:
lakshana: definition
bheda: various divisions or categories of the science
upaya: means, instruments or methods of obtaining the desired
ends of the science
phala: end results obtained
In the Yoga-siitras the definition is stated in Sitra I.2: Yoga is the
control of the fluctuations of the mind-field. The divisions are
sSamprajnadta and asamprajfidta samadhis. The method is the eight
limbs of yoga. The end result is kaivalya, absoluteness of conscious-
ness, as explained in the fourth chapter.
It is requisite that the author should also state in the beginning
of his text the four binding reasons (anubandhas):
vishaya. the subject matter of the text
Prayojana_ its purpose
adhikd@ra: the qualification of the student
sambandha: the relationship of these three with the text
SUTRA I1 61

The subject of the Yoga-sitras is, of course, yoga with its var-
ious categories and subdivisions, methods, and the end result.
The purpose is self-realization (kaivalya) and release or liberation
(moksha). The student is qualified whenever he has the jijfiasa,
desire for knowledge, and mumuksha, determination for libera-
tion. One who has the desire for knowledge is called a jijfadsu and
one who has the determination for liberation is termed a mumuk-
shu. These are the qualified students of yoga.

The relationship between yoga and the Yoga-sitras is that of an
expositor and exposition; the relationship between yoga and the
student is that of a practice and its practitioner; and the relationship
between the student and liberation is that of an achiever and his
goal.

Siitra I.1 is an adhikGra-sittra or uddesha-sitra (see Prologue,
pp. 20-21) stating the topic of the text.
62 SUTRAII1
Sitra 1.1 AT VAUTTMTATT |
atha yoganushasanam
atha: now, at an auspicious moment of transition
yoga-: (of) yoga
anu-: within or following (a tradition)
Shasanam: instruction, discipline, teaching
Now, at this auspicious moment of transition begins the instruc-
tion in the discipline of yoga following the past tradition.
Vyasa’s Commentary

Atha ‘now’—this word here has the purpose of indicating author-
ity, qualification and commencement of the subject matter, so that
the science called the Discipline of Yoga be known as the subject
matter, the instruction of which commences by those authorized to
those qualified.

Yoga 1s samadhi. And that samadhi is a universal attribute of
the mind-field (chitta), common to all levels. The five grounds,
levels, of the mind-field are:

kshipta. disturbed

midha_ somnolent, stupefied

vikshipta: distracted

ekdgra. one-pointed

niruddha_ controlled
Among these, that samadhi subordinated and eclipsed by distrac-
tion in a distracted mind-field is not fit to be included within the
category of yoga.

That, however is called samadhi of wisdom (samprajfiata yoga),
which in a one-pointed mind-field

+ fully illuminates an actual state or object (artha) that has become

real, has been realized,

+ diminishes the afflictions and impurities (k/eshas),
SOTRA I.1 63
e loosens the bonds of karma, and
« brings about the possibility of control (nirodha) face to face, as it
were.
As we shall explain later, that state of samprajfdta samadhi is of
four types:
« accompanied by discursive thought
« accompanied by subtle thought
* accompanied by ecstasy
« accompanied by I-am-ness
However, when all the modifications (vrttis) have come under
control (nirodha), then it is called the acognitive (asamprajfata)
samadhi.
Discussion
The exposition on this siitra will be divided into three sections,
one for each of the three words atha, yoga and anushdsana.
I. ATHA
Certain words in the tradition are considered auspicious; that is,
their occurrence in the beginning of a text imparts a blessing. Even
though the translation of the word is not a blessing, its pronuncia-
tion in itself invokes a blessing. All the commentators quote:
The words OM and atha came from the Creator’s throat
in the beginning of the creation;
hence both these words are auspicious.
It is a norm in all theistic traditions to begin any undertaking with
the invocation of a blessing; here no special words are used for
that purpose alone; rather the word atha is bifunctional: May the
study undertaken, the guidance given and received, and the disci-
plines observed come to bear their desired results without impedi-
ments. The Brahma-siitras, the major text of the Vedanta philosophy,
64 SOTRAII
also begins with the word atha. Shankaracharya’s commentary on
this passage (Brahma-sitra 1.1) says:

The word atha, used 1n an entirely different sense, yet invokes a

blessing merely by its pronunciation.

Now we come to the literal sense of the word and its function as
part of the teaching itself. Atha is a word of the particle (avyaya)
category. Such words remain unchangeable in all grammatical and
syntactical situations, and express states that are themselves immut-
able. Atha denotes a transition. How can a transition be immutable,
when any transition always occurs only as part of a mutability?
How can one conceive of a transition without a change?

The answer to this question is that it is human nature to observe
transitions. People throughout the world celebrate the transitions
of sun and moon from season to season and year to year. Major
festivals are designed for the celebration of these transitions. The
transitions of a life cycle are also observed with great joy or solem-
nity. Baptisms, weddings, bar mitzvahs, confirmations, as well as
graduations and anniversaries, come within this category. The yoga
tradition celebrates sixteen sacraments, starting from before con-
ception and continuing through initiations, marriage, renunciation,
up to the last rites. It is not possible, however, for one to celebrate
every transition of life. Most people are not even aware of their
subtle transitions, such as, for example, the change in breath rhy-
thms that occurs about every ninety minutes, varying somewhat
among different individuals.

In the methods that great yogis employ to teach their disciples,
only the fewest words are used. A disciple must understand many
levels of meaning from a single sound. The word atha expresses
the “now” of a transition. The student is advised by use of the
word atha that he must learn to observe the now of a transition.

He must learn to notice, for instance, the exact moment when the
breath rhythm shifts from one nostril to the other. The yogis know
that no transition occurs without first touching the “eternal now.”
When this is understood, an instantaneous illumination may take
place in the disciple’s consciousness.
SOTRAIL1 65
Transitions are discussed here with a view to understanding the
yoga philosophy of time, space and causation. For most observers
all time and space pass through a series of causes and effects—one
thing seems to lead to another, each cause producing an effect, one
object becoming another from one moment in time to another,
moving from one space to another. While this is so at a superficial
level at which those uninitiated into advanced yogic disciplines
perceive the relative reality of worldly phenomena, yoga masters
experience things at a deeper level. They say that it is not that a
prior cause produces a subsequent effect, a former moment gives
birth to a following moment, one particle causes momentum in
another. Rather, all of these moments, particles and spaces are
united in a common field (kshetra). No particle or moment passes
from one state to another without first touching that common field
on which the former and the latter are united. In other words, all
transitions among pluralities occur only through the touch of a
common singularity. There is no abrupt jump. All the fields are
united in the supreme field of infinity. In this field there is no past,
present or future—no prior or posterior. When the breath rhythm
shifts from one nostril to the other—or more accurately, the energy
flow moves from id@ to pingala or vice versa—for a micromoment
the consciousness passes through the central stream called the
sushumna.' An initiate is advised to get hold of that moment,
dwell in it, and enter the infinite consciousness through it.
1 In yoga teachings all movement and configurations of the physical body are considered to
be gross manifestations of much subtler currents and fields, called the n@gis Within the
human personality flow 72,000 of these subtle energy channels, around which such things as
the nerves and organs group themselves The central nadi, metaphoncally said to be one
ten-thousandth of a hair’s breadth in diameter, flows through the spinal column and ts
known as sushumnd On the right side of sushumnd 1s pingala nadi, which controls the
sympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system and governs “active” (masculine,
solar) functions On the left side of sushumnd 1s ida naédi, which controls the parasym-
pathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system and governs “intuitive” (feminine, lunar)
tunctions By certain systematic yoga disciplines the :¢@ and pingala@ nadis are balanced so
that the sushumnd channel opens and samadhi is possible For more complete information
see Swam: Rama, Rudolph Ballentine, M.D , and Swami Ajyaya, Ph D , Yoga and Psycho-
therapy (Honesdale, Pa Himalayan International Institute of Yoga Science and Philosophy,
1976), pp 42-43, 45, 53-55, 58-59, 266 See also “The Awakening of Kundalini” and “Energy
of Consciousness in the Human Personality” in Inspired Thoughts of Swami Rama (Hones-
dale, Pa Himalayan International Institute, 1983), pp 197-230, and “Laya Yoga™ and
“Kundalini Yoga” in Swami Rama, Choosing a Path (Himalayan International Institute,
1982), pp 147-94
66 SOTRAII

To go further: We experience our world in terms of moment-
particle coordinates. Each particle has a movement within a moment,
and many particles together make an object, a phenomenon; many
moments following one upon another make a certain length of
time. The yogi says that it is not true to say that a prior moment’s
cause produces the subsequent moment’s effect, although it cer-
tainly does appear to be so in a world of transience. But when the
many transiences are transcended, the actual reality is very different.

Each moment arises directly from infinity.

Each moment dissolves into infinity.

The next moment also arises directly from infinity.

Concentration on what is between the dissolution of the prior
moment and the arising of the subsequent moment opens the
gateway to infinity.

The word atha reminds the initiated disciple to concentrate on
such immutability as is perceived in transitions as explained above.
Let him dwell in the now. As the concentration is refined, the now
covers only a micromoment. Soon the disciple learns to step aside
from the procession in which he was previously a participant. The
procession of particle-moment coordinates may continue for other
participants, but not for the disciple who has stepped aside. While
he may continue to watch it from outside as a spectator, as it were,
he 1s not moved by its motion or momentum. The karma process
ceases here; he dwells in the eternal now.

This now is the beginning and the end of the Discipline of Yoga.

There is a controversy among commentators concerning the
real purpose of the word atha. As has already been mentioned, the
word expresses:

@nantarya. transition in a sequence
adhikara: a teacher’s authority, a student’s fulfilment of a qualifi-
cation, and simply the statement of commencement
Commentators have said nothing about transition or the awareness
of now within the oral tradition. They have taken into consideration
SOTRA LEI 67
other purposes of the word and agree that the word simply expresses
(a) commencement of the topic, and (b) Patafijali’s authority to un-
dertake the same. In their view it does not express any kind of
sequence in which there might be any implication of a student
fulfilling a qualification. They say

the word atha expresses here adhikara and not dnantarya.
It is interesting to contrast this with the first stitra of the Brahma-
siitras by the same Vyasa:

Now, from here on the desire to know Brahman.
Shankaracharya? says of that siitra:

The word atha expresses here Gnantarya and not adhikara.

Although metaphysical texts, especially those of the Vedanta
philosophy, state that a student is qualified when he has practised
the “six treasures” (shaf-sampat):

Shama: quietude

dama: restraint

uparati: withdrawal from worldly interests

titaksha: forbearance

Shraddha: faith, humility, surrender

samdadhana. freedom from conflicts
and although the Brhadaranyaka Upanishad (1V.4.23) says,
2 The eighth century sage Shankara 1s considered to be the greatest of the Indian philosophers
Following in the footsteps of Gaudapada, the guru of his guru (Govinda), who wrote the
Mandik \a-harikas, the most complete ancient statement on Vedanta philosophy, Shankara
wrote definitive commentanes on the Upanishads, the Bhagavad-gita and the Brahma- or
Vedanta-sitray as well as such philosophical works as Viveha-c hidamani ( The Crest Jewel
of Discrimimation) Although his brief life of thirty-two years was accompanied by many
miraculous events, his greatest accomplishment was the Ineral transtormation ot India by
his restoration of the ancient Wisdom of the Vedas in the light of his advarta (non-dual)
school of Vedanta and his establishment of many monastic schools to carry on the spiritual
tradition He established four seats of supreme religious and philosophical authority in
India which have been occupied by an unbroken succession of saints, titled Shankara-
charyas, from his day to the present
68 SUTRAI1

then, pacified, controlled, having withdrawn, forbearing,

harmonized, one should see the self in the self,
none of these qualifications is implied in the Yoga-siitras. This is
not to say that any unqualified student may be admitted to the
study and practice of yoga. The commentators are simply discussing
Patafijali’s actual intent in using the word atha. Pataiijali only
wished to express his desire to convey the knowledge. A desire to
know (jijfidsa) on the part of the student is implied and that Patafi-
jali has this knowledge (jfana). There exist in the tradition prepara-
tions prerequisite to imparting a teaching, such as (a) a student’s
application and raising of questions, (b) his ascetic observances
and purifications, (c) preparing the body through rasdyanas,} etc.
Even though there is no question that Patafijali, himself probably
an author on medical science, is aware of these and other prepara-
tions, his use of the word atha—in the opinions expressed by
commentators—does not imply any of these preparations. He only
expresses the fact that he knows, and wishes the knowledge to be
conveyed.

All the other schools of philosophy, such as Vedanta, state that
liberation is attained through knowledge, but they also prescribe
various spiritual preparations. It is agreed among them that the
means to attain that knowledge is yoga. That yoga is taught here.
Patafijali asserts by the word atha that he is the authoritative
teacher and wishes this knowledge of yoga to be conveyed. Hence
he commences the teaching.

3 The science of rasayana 1s not well known and requires some explanation The word 1s
derived from the multilevel word rasa, which refers to fluid essences of any kind In alchemy
it means mercury, in herbal medicine it means a juice, in the human body all fluids are
called rasas In the ancient medical science of dyur-veda an alchemy of the human body was
practised whereby all the body’s base and corrupting factors were cleansed and converted
into eae thereby reyuvenating the body These highly complex practises required appli-
cation o'

* internal purifications and disciplines,

* dietary prescriptions,

© herbal juices and potions, and

. Pas of mercury, sulphur, gold, etc , administered in carefully prepared

oses,

Sometimes such an alteration of body chemistry was necessary when it was intended that
the person remain in samadhi for a prolonged period of time, or when it was necessary to
strengthen the body for especially strenuous practices
SOTRAL1 69

Madhavacharya clarifies that since discipline (anushdsana) in-
cludes the practices of pacification (Shama), etc., there is no point
in also trying to make them as prerequisites under the word atha.

The word atha has these purposes here: (a) an auspicious invo-
cation, (b) a statement of Patafijali’s authority, and (c) a declara-
tion of the commencement of Patafijali’s teaching. This is the view
of the commentators. The oral tradition, however, concurs with
YS 1.1:

Now, this is the discipline of yoga.
That is to say, if one could observe his transitions and the way the
states between moments serve as gateways to infinity, all the stages
of yoga would be at his command. The student’s qualifications are
not denied but simply not stated until the word “discipline” (anu-
Shasana) is encountered.

According to the commentators, selectiveness as to the meanings
of atha is applicable here only and not universally. That is why
Vyasa says,

Atha—this word here.

Previous traditions within which yoga is taught by Patafijali also
are important to these matters. The name of Yogi YAajfiavalkya
occurs repeatedly in the Upanishads as one of the greatest meta-
physicians of his time. His statement affirms the entire yoga tradition:
Hiranya-garbha alone 1s the teacher of yoga, and no other.
Brhad-yogi-yajfiavalkya-smrti X11 5
The word Hiranya-garbha means “the Golden Womb.” The word
occurs in the ancient Vedas:
In the beginning was the Golden Womb.
Re-veda X.121.1

All the yogis insist that no individual person is a teacher, master,

or guru, but that the Golden Womb alone is the guru. In that
70 SOTRALI

womb the minds of all beings are like fetuses. As a fetus receives
nourishment from the mother through the umbilical cord, so all
minds in meditation receive knowledge from the Golden Womb,
the Teaching Spirit of the Universe. This is similar to the Christian
notion of the Holy Spirit, who is the teacher of all teachers. When
one frees himself from all ego, all the knowledge of the Golden
Womb flows into him effortlessly and naturally. Just as a fetus,
receiving nourishment from its mother, does not know itself separate
from her, so those in meditation do not know themselves separate
from the Golden Womb. All revelation is of the grace that flows
from the Golden Womb into the minds of those in meditation.
Some traditions assert that the Golden Womb reveals itself in the
beginning of creation in the minds of the first human beings. Others
go so far as to say that the first human being is a Master, who is
an incarnation of the Golden Womb, the Teaching Spirit that has
become flesh and from whom all spiritual knowledge begins and is
handed down through the lineage of the yogis. He is also known as
the Progenitor (Prajapati) or Brahma (a masculine word not to be
confused with the neuter word Brahman), the founder and first
teacher of the Vedas. All the yogis trace their lineage, through
their masters, ultimately to Hiranya-garbha or Prajapati or Brahma,
whose own teacher is no other but Svayam-bhi, the Self-Existent
Being.

The Brhadaranyaka Upanishad, considered to be the oldest of
the Upanishads and dating back to approximately the thirteenth
century BC, states the spiritual genealogy of teachers up to that
time. Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 1V.6.1-3 lists fifty-nine genera-
tions of teachers, and VI.5.1!-4 lists sixty-six generations up to that
time and going back to Brahma, who is the same as the Golden
Womb. Other texts such as the Puranas give much longer lists.

It is called a golden womb because when a master initiates a
disciple into its mysteries, the disciple experiences within himself
the presence of a golden light. Unlike the foggy light of the dream
state, which is unclear consciousness, this golden light of the higher
state of consciousness imparts a luminosity to the seeker’s mind,
in the presence of which intuitive knowledge often dawns (Kena
SOTRAILI 71

Upanishad 11.25). Often the visage of such a person shines with a

golden light.

The word “womb,” in addition to the explanation above, also
suggests that an enlightened being, who has chosen to incarnate
for the benefit of the world, often receives reminiscences of this
supreme knowledge while still within the mother’s womb and is
then born a teacher.

The question arises that if Hiranya-garbha is the teacher of yoga,
why is such importance given to Patafijali? Why does Patafijali
present himself as such a figure of authority? The question may be
answered in two ways:

1. The authenticity of the opening verse of Vyasa’s commentary is
controversial because some manuscripts include it and others do
not. However, the verse says that Patafijali is the same who
incarnates again and again to teach the knowledge of yoga, even
through he may bear different names from incarnation to in-
carnation.

2. The other way lies in the word anushdsana, which we have
translated as “discipline.”

Il. ANUSHASANA
The word anushasana is derived from the prefix anu and the

verb root Shas. The prefix anu denotes that something is subse-

quent, a follow-up to something else that formerly occurred or
existed. The verb §ha@s means “to impart a discipline or a teaching”
or “to teach with a definite discipline.” The English word “discipline,”
meaning a field of study, is similar. A teaching without an atten-
dant discipline will not be expressed with the verb Shas. From the
same verb is derived the word for a disciple (Shishya), one who 1s
to be taught with and within a discipline. In the ancient education
systems of India the teaching of every subject was imparted within
the context of an @shrama discipline with definite rules of life.
There were three types of graduates:
72, SUOTRALI
vidya-snataka: one who has mastered a science
yrata-snataka: one who has demonstrated the mastery of personal
discipline
vidyd-vrata-snataka: one who has proficiency in a field of learning
and has demonstrated the mastery of personal disciplines
It was the third type of graduate who was most cherished as a
disciple. Knowledge in the ancient ashramas was not imparted
indiscriminately.
Knowledge came to the philosopher (bra@hmana) and said,
“I am your treasure; do guard me.
Do not give me away to someone malicious—
so that I may grow in strength.
Only whom you know to be pure, controlled,
a master of passions, a celibate—
give me to him, a wise man who guards his treasure
without negligence.”
Lawbook of Manu 11.114-15

Similar injunctions are given in the tradition elsewhere and re-

peatedly.

The prefix anu has these two connotations in the word anushasana:

1. The discipline of yoga is being imparted only after the student
has demonstrated his purity in observances of self-discipline and
has prepared the ground in which the seed is to be sown. Be-
cause this idea was inherent in the word anushdasana, it need not
be expressed in the word atha.

2. The commentators say, “Shishtasya shdsanam-anushdsanam”:
“AnuSshasana means ‘to teach that which has been taught before,
to teach within an existing tradition, not claiming that anything
new has been created by the author.’ ”

Patafijali by using the prefix anu issues a disclaimer to his own

authorship of the science even though by the word atha he has

stated his authority to teach it.
The word anushdsana also means “that (text) by which the science
SOTRAI.1 73
(of samadhi, in this case) is taught, together with the means of its
attainment and fruits, so that it fructifies and succeeds.” This knowl-
edge is open to anyone who seeks absoluteness and liberation (kai-
valya). Such a text taught within a tradition and with a discipline
is called a Shastra; hence the entire science is known as yoga-shastra.
In this context Vydsa’s sentence is again presented:

Atha ‘now’—this word here has the purpose of indicating au-

thority, qualification and commencement of the subject matter,

so that the science called the Discipline of Yoga be known as the

subject matter, the instruction of which commences by those

authorized to those qualified.4
Il. YOGA

As to the word “yoga,” Vyasa simply says,

Yoga is samadhi.
The word can be derived from the Sanskrit verb yuj, which occurs
in Panini’s list of verbs (dhadtu-patha) in several forms as follows:

yu of the fourth conjugation (yujyate), meaning “samadhi”;

yuyir of the sixth conjugation (yunakri), meaning “samadhi”, and

yuj of the tenth conjugation (yoyayati), meaning “to join” or “to

restrain” or “to keep under control, as in yoking.”

The English word “yoke” is acknowledged by the Oxford English
Dictionary to be cognate to yuj, and so is the word “join.” “Yoke”
4 Its interesting to note that Patafiyal’s Mahabhdashya, his vast exposition on Panint's
grammar, begins with words almost identical to YS 11 The first sentences of Vyasa’s
commentary on the Mahabhdashya read as follows

Now, the instruction in the discipline of words The word atha ‘now’ has the

purpose of indicating authority, qualification and commencement of the subject

matter, so that the science called the Discipline of Words may be known as the

subyect matter, the instruction of which commences by those authonzed to those

qualified
Other similarities between the Yoga-sitras and Vydsa, on the one hand, and the grammatical
texts, on the other, have been studied by numerous scholars. The relationship of the science
of yoga and the science of speech has been explained to a certain extent in the author's
book Mantra and Meditation (Honesdale, Pa Himalayan International Institute of Yoga
Science and Philosophy, 1981)
74 SOTRAI1

is derived from the third yzj in the above list; “join” is from the
second but its meaning is from the third. Ancient Vedic texts use
the former two as meaning “to experience samadhi.” According to
Vyasa, the word “yoga” in this stitra is derived not from the yuj of
yoking or joining but from the verbs meaning “samadhi.” However,
one is then left with the question of why the oral tradition often
states that the word may be derived from the verb meaning “joining”
or “yoking.” This may be explained by the fact that the ancient
sages of the period of the Vedas and early Upanishads experienced
samadhi as a union of the individual and the universal self, thereby
lending a secondary meaning to the same verb. The primary meaning
was probably “samadhi,” as seen in the most ancient hymns (for
example, Rg-veda V.81.1), but elsewhere the Vedic and Upanishadic
literature is replete with usage of the verbs from the fourth and
sixth conjugations in the sense of “uniting,” “joining,” as well as
“restraining” and “yoking.” Examples of this usage include Rg-
veda 1.82.6 and X.101.3; Kaushitaki Upanishad 11.6; Kena Upani-
shad 1.1; Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 11.5.19 and V.13.2; and numer-
ous other places. A study of the ancient texts shows, therefore,
that the forms are used interchangeably.

The oral tradition has scant regard for the artificial rules of
grammar, but the grammarians themselves admit, as does Patafijali
(not in the Yoga-sitras but in the Mahabhashya, his work on
grammar), that grammarians only acknowledge the usage of words
as found in the Vedas and among the people. Therefore one need
not concern himself unduly if there appears to be a conflict between
grammarians and philosophers. Furthermore, since philosophy is
being studied here, one needs to accept Vydsa’s statement that the
word “yoga” in the Yoga-sitras means “samadhi.” This 1s also the
view held by MA. The oral tradition goes on to explain that the
process leading to samadhi begins with restraining the senses, and
yoking the mind to the inner self, and that the experience of samadhi
itself is joining the lower self and the higher self. All of these layers
5 Why Panini, considered to be history's foremost grammarian, chose to differentiate them
so substantially can only be answered by the guess that perhaps by his time the conjyuga-
tional forms of the verbs had settled into fixed meanings as recorded by him
SOTRA LI 75
and levels of the endeavour and experience are included in the
word “yoga.” And since “restraining,” “yoking,” or “joining” used
separately would have been incomplete, Vyasa chose to derive the
word from the verb meaning “samadhi.” This falls within the con-
vention of Indian logic known as angdrigi-bhava: that is to say,
when a statement is made concerning a complete entity (avigin ‘one
who owns arvigas, or parts’), each one of its parts (amigas) is already
included. MA says that the endeavour and experience of samadhi
is inclusive of restraining, yoking and joining, since these fall within
the eight awgas of yoga. BR says that not only a joining or union
but even a separation (vi-yoga) may be included among the parts
that constitute the complete endeavour of samadhi. The separation,
according to BR, is between the conscious self and its attachment
to matter: pum-prakrtyor viyogo pi yogah.

AD also says that yoga as union means the merging together of
mind and self (4tman) like that of water and salt. No further
explanation of this theory is given. How this merging of mind and
self in a yogi differs from the personality of one still in ignorance
and bondage is not explained. He goes on to say that the word
“samadhi” may be explained in two ways:

ethat by which the mind 1s brought to concentration. In this instru-

mental sense it is the eighth limb (aviga) of yoga.

ethat state in which the operations such as prdna are brought

under control. In this locative sense it 1s synonymous with yoga
proper.

The question arises that if samadhi, too, is enumerated among
the eight angas, limbs, of yoga, then how can it be regarded as that
whole, the angin, of which the others are limbs, parts, or the
means thereto? This difficulty is resolved by different commentators
in different ways. AD, for instance, implies that by the word
“samadhi” Vyasa does not mean the eighth limb of yoga but simply
yoga nama samadhanam: that “samadhi” means samadhana ‘har-
monizing’, ‘a resolving of conflicts within and without’, in the same
sense in which the word samadh@na is used among the “six trea-
sures” prerequisite to liberation (p. 67, above). Both RY and SS
76 SUOTRAI.1

explain that yoga, meaning “samadhi,” has two levels as explained
in YS I.17,18. The reader is referred to those two sitras, which
explain the samadhi of wisdom (samprajfiata samadhi) and the
acognitive (asamprajfata) samadhi. Of these two the cognitive, yet
alloyed, is only a step toward the final goal of the acognitive. RY
and SS hold that the former is a limb and a means (a7ga) while the
latter is the true yoga in its entirety and perfection. RY further
states that when Vy4sa says that

samadhi is a universal attribute of the mind-field (chitta), common

to all levels,
Vyasa’s view is that samadhi is an attribute of the mind-field:
because the modifications (vrttis) of the mind-field are attributes of
the mind-field, samadhi being only their control or cessation (as
defined in the present siitra), samadhi is an attribute of the mind-
field! This seems to be totally untenable and does not fit any of the
yoga traditions.

An alternative explanation is that yoga is being taught to the
students of Patafijali on two different levels: (1) an experiential
level, which cannot be put into formal wording; and (2) a formal
system of philosophy with its own terminology. Sometimes the two
do not coincide. The formal systematization of the philosophy
States that yoga is the control of the modifications of the mind-
field and samadhi is the eighth of its limbs (a7igas) and means.
Vyasa, the commentator par excellence, does not wish the student
to forget that a true follower of yoga must see even beyond these
definitions; otherwise why would he venture a definition of yoga in
his commentary on YS 1.1 when Patafijali, from whose work Vyasa
could not mean to detract, has already defined yoga in YS 1.2?
When Vya4sa says

Yogah samadhih ‘yoga is samadhi’,
he is referring neither to yoga as defined in YS I.2, nor to samadhi
as defined in YS 1.17,18, nor as it is included among the eight
angas in YS 11.29 and II1.3.
SOTRAI1 77
The problem is solved only by reading Vy4sa’s next sentence:
And that samadhi is a universal attribute of the mind-field (chitta),
common to all levels.
The word “universal” (sa@rva-bhauma) needs an explanation. Liter-
ally it means “that which remains in all bhiamis,” that is, grounds,
levels or plateaus that are attained and subsequently passed on
the way to the highest samadhi. What exactly are these bhamis at
which the yogi arrives and then leaves behind as he proceeds to his
goal? There are many definitions of this term in the Yoga-sitras
and the commentaries. These should be studied in detail as the
reader refers to the pertinent siitras: YS 1.30, I1.27, I1I.6. In com-
menting on YS II.27, Vyasa defines the seven levels of attainment
as follows:
1. One has recognized what he must renounce (pain); it no more
needs to be known.
2. One has eliminated the causes of pain; they no longer need to
be diminished.
3. One has realized the vanquishing of pain through attainment
of the samadhi of total control (nirodha-samadhi).
4. One has cultivated the means of the removal of pain; that is,
discrimination between self and non-self has been perfected.
5. The faculty of discrimination (buddhi) has now completed its
work.
6. The attributes (gunas) of nature are dissolved into their material
cause and no longer bind the self.
7. The self no longer has any relationships with material nature
or the non-self and 1s now pure light, absolute, alone.
In his commentary on YS I11.51 Vyasa describes the yogis at four
different levels of attainment:
1. Those who have just begun the experience of light; these are
called beginners (prathama-kalpika)
2. Those whose intuitive wisdom (rtambhara prajfa) has begun
to blossom, they are being tempted by the powerful beings of
the subtle worlds to enjoy the powers recently gained; these
are at the honeyed ground (madhu-bhiimi).
78 SUTRAII
3. Those who have conquered the senses and their attractions
and have mastered the elements; they have become firmly pro-
tective toward all that needs to be cultivated and firm in all the
duties they need to perform; they are prajfia-jyotis, for wisdom
is their light.
4. Those who have transcended all processes and no longer have
anything remaining yet to be cultivated (atikranta-bhavaniya).
VM, however, enumerates four bharnis, as follows:
1. madhumati: honeyed, filled with sweetness
2. madhu-pratika: where the honey of the first ground has become
as though it had been only symbolic of this second level to
come
3. vi-Shoka: beyond grief
4. samskara-Shesha: where only the impressions of past karmas
and experiences remain as deposits, but no fresh karma is
formed®
The question remains as to which one of these groups Vyasa
refers when he says that samadhi is an attribute common to all the
grounds of a yogi’s development. The answer is that even though
VM says that the four, madhumati and so forth, are meant, that
does not seem to be Vydsa’s intent, since he goes on to enumerate
five states of the mind-field:
kshipta: disturbed
midha’ somnolent, stupefied
vikshipta: distracted from meditation
ekagra. one-pointed
niruddha: controlled
Before these five are discussed in detail, it is still necessary to
understand what is meant by the statement that
6 Of these four bhamis the first 1s the same as no 2 of YS I115t The second, madhu-
pratikd, 1s defined in Vyasa’s commentary on YS 11148 The third, vi-Shokd, 1s defined in
YS 1 36. The fourth, samsk@ra-Shesha, occursin YS118 The reader should compare these
references to the list
SUOTRALI1 79
samadhi is a universal attribute of the mind-field (chitta), common
to all levels.
How can samadhi be an attribute in an agitated, somnolent or
distracted mind?

As MA explains it, the nature of the spiritual self is defined
throughout the Sankhya and yoga philosophies to be pure, absolute,
immutable. This nature never changes no matter what kind of
mind serves as a mantle to the pure, spiritual self. Thus the tran-
scendent being never loses its transcendence. Its immutability always
remains unimpaired. This force, called consciousness, is never altered
(YS 11.20,21; 1V.34). Only the mind-field goes through the three
altered states of consciousness called wakeful awareness of objects,
dream and sleep. Since transcendence remains unaffected, it equally
permeates all functions, operations, experiences and states that are
dependent on this consciousness. Since mind is regarded as a modi-
fication of matter and is not spiritual, it is also dependent on the
consciousness of the spiritual self, whom it has no power to corrupt
in any way. According to YS IV. 18, all the vrttis of the mind-field
are always known to the spiritual self. The natural state of this self
is samadhi, which always remains so even though the mind-field
goes through various alterations.

This being the case, no question arises regarding Vydsa’s state-
ment that samadhi is a state that remains throughout the various
levels of attainment. A human being is a compound of the power
of pure consciousness and the corruptible, alterable, mutable ma-
terial (including mental) components. When a person rediscovers
the separation of the spiritual component from the material one,
that is called isolation of the self from matter (Kaivalya). It is not
that the spiritual self itself had ever mingled with lowly matter, but
that it had lent its own power to matter so that the latter could
function as the mind. Its own sam&dhi remains unbroken. It is the
universal (s@rvabhauma) common ground of all other operations
of the compound personality.

The total and permanent incorruptibility and immutability of
the spiritual self is the fundamental tenet of yoga philosophy. If
80 SOTRAILI1

any of the attributes of this self were to increase or decrease even
in an immeasurably minute degree, the entire tenet would have to
be rejected. In that case transcendence would be no transcendence
at all because it would be subject to alteration. There would simply
be no point in pursuing yoga because it would only lead to a
temporary state (parinadma), which is the cause of our pains. So it
must be reiterated that samadhi is the permanent and natural state
of the spiritual self.

VM explains that the definition of yoga as control of the opera-
tions of the mind-field (YS 1.2) is effective only with regard to the
practical aspects of yoga. Lest one come away with the impression
that the vrttis are apprehensions or cognitions residing in the self,
Vyasa specifies that they are attributes of the mind-field. The tran-
scendent illumination of the self imparts its luminosity to the mind-
field, whereby the mind-field functions and even undergoes all of
its operations and alterations. It is in this sense that Vyasa says,

Samadhi is a universal attribute of the mind-field (chitta), com-
mon to all levels.

VB says that a little meditative concentration shows through
even in the agitation, somnolence or distraction of the mind; hence,
too, samadhi may be considered as the universal ground of all
these alterations.

In any case mind-field (chitta) is not to be confused with the
pure consciousness (chiti).

Here a question arises: If samadhi (in the sense of transcendence)
is the permanent nature of the spiritual self and mind 1s regarded
as a mode of matter, how can Vyasa say that

samadhi ts a universal attribute of the mind-field (chitta), common

to all levels
VM has tried to resolve the apparent conflict by saying that it is
not the entire mind-field that is meant. According to Sankhya-
yoga philosophy, one of the four aspects of the inner sense is in
closest touch with the self. That aspect is called the faculty of
SOTRAI1 81
discrimination (buddhi). This faculty has two faces: an outward
face, looking toward the conscious mind and the senses, that may
be called “the faculty of intelligence”; and an inward face, looking
toward the spiritual self, that may be called “the faculty of intuition.”

The buddhi’s faculty of discrimination serves as the channel
between the spiritual self and the rest of the personality. Buddhi
partakes of that finest, purest-possible aspect of nature (prakrti)
known as sattva, whose attribute is illumination. The light of the
self by itself is immutable, and the self is untouched by any qualities
of matter. However, the face of the self reflects in the buddhi like a
ray of sun into a crystal mirror, from which it is deflected onto, or
passes through to, other aspects of mind, and from there to the
brain, the senses and the rest of the personality. It is this reflected
or deflected light alone that operates the whole personality, while
the spiritual self, the soul, remains aloof, immutable.

Without the presence of this reflected illumination the human
personality is nothing but dead matter. The presence of this reflected
light gives to the buddhi, and thereby to the rest of the mind-field,
the power which enables the whole mind to perform all of its
functions and to go through all of its stages of development. Because
this light of samadhi is ever-present in the back of the mind, in the
inward face of the buddhi, it is in this sense that samadhi is the
permanent and universal attribute of the mind even during its
lower states of awareness.

The presence of this state of samadhi, even in the lower, disturbed
states, is demonstrated by the fact that no matter how agitated the
mind may be at any given time it still concentrates on only one
thing or another, one thought or another, one emotion or another.
If it dwells on any thought for even a fleeting micromoment, it is
still a level of concentration. Without this faculty of concentration,
the mind could not even be agitated. The yogis dwell on and in the
concentration, ignoring the surface agitation. Thus, once again,
samadhi is a universal and permanent attribute of the mind.

Of the many levels of the mind’s operations, one has to cease
before another can be introduced. This is not possible unless buddhi
and the mind-field establish control over each level. That the mind
82 SUTRAILI

is able to shift from one level to another, one state to another,
shows that it has mastery, control (mirodha)—the primary definition
of samadhi (see pp. 86ff. and YS 1.2)—at all times. Thus also is
samadhi a permanent and universal attribute of the mind-field.

Manifestation of the degree of samadhi, however, is another
matter. The mind, a modification of matter, is constituted of its
three gunas. The disturbed states of the mind reflect the simple
disequilibrium of the three gunas which is the common nature of
all creation; the mind, being part of that creation, partakes of that
disequilibrium. It is the varying degrees of disequilibrium in the
proportion and predominance of the gunas that cause varying states
of mind. Vydsa’s concern here is not with other bhamis but only
with the five states of the mind-field (kshipta, etc.). Of these, the
agitated (kshipta) state is dominated by rajas, totally unsteady,
always flung about from one object to another. This is the wakeful
state of a “normal” person in the world.

The somnolent (madha) state is dominated by tamas, which
represents the state of sleep and other forms of stupor such as
being comatose, inebriated, drug-afflicted, or otherwise generally
not alert. In other words, there is not a definite boundary line
between kshipta and midha. Often a wakeful person considers
himself to be quite alert but, under the influence of tamas, makes a
stupid mistake.

There are other examples of the alternation between kshipta and
midha, or between the dominance of rajas and tamas. For instance,
says VB, rayas draws us toward the objects of attraction, causing a
mood called raga in which the mind 1s coloured by the object of
attraction. When the wish to enjoy or possess the object of that
raga is thwarted, a negation ensues. The mind becomes clouded
with tamas, and consequently depression (vishada) begins. One can
similarly analyse the alterations of moods and other emotional
states by observing the alternating dominance of rajas and tamas.

Vyasa has included kshipta and midha in his enumeration of
the five states but then throughout the rest of the text has nothing
much to say about them except where it is absolutely necessary, as
in the case of the vrtti for sleep (nidra), which 1s discussed in YS
SOTRA LI 83
1.12. The two states of kshipta and miudha are of no interest to
Patafijali and Vyasa. They have been generally ignored by Indian
sages, whereas they are a major preoccupation of contemporary
Western psychologists.

Our concern begins with vi-kshipta, a modification of, and some
improvement on, the agitated kshipta. On the way to samadhi,
sattva begins to assert its illuminative power. The mind begins here
to find some concentration, but its former habits keep dragging it
away from sattva. Rajas and tamas do not want to let go, but
sattva has begun to make its presence felt. When the mind is still
distracted from concentration, which experience has already begun,
that state is called distraction (vikshepa). Vikshepas are the nine
impediments (YS 1.30) and their five companions (YS 1.31). A
mind afflicted by vikshepas is vikshipta.

There arises the possibility that those experiencing meditation
with such a distraction might claim themselves to be yogis. To
eliminate such a misunderstanding about the nature of yoga, Vyasa
says:

Samadhi subordinated and eclipsed by distraction in a distracted

[vikshipta] mind-field 1s not fit to be included within the category

of yoga [that is, samadhi, since he has defined yoga to mean

samadhi].
In a vikshipita mind samadhi occurs intermittently, in short bursts.
It is not conducive to elimination of k/eshas (defined in YS I1.3ff ).
When someone is overcome by an enemy, he is powerless and
ineffective, in fact, he loses his very face, his very nature. When
concentration is overcome by rajas and tamas in the wikshipta
state, its sattva 1s nowhere to be found. To give another analogy,
when a seed has fallen into a fire and remains there even for three
or four seconds, it is thereafter unable to sprout. Likewise, when
concentration has fallen into the fire of rajas even for three or four
seconds, it has no power to lead a personality toward samadhi.

Having dismissed the first three states as unworthy of a detailed
definition (a-/akshya), Vyasa introduces the fourth state of mind,
84 SOTRAII
ekadgra, or samprajfiata samadhi. He states that this is called sam-
prajfiata yoga, samadhi of wisdom,

which in a one-pointed (ekagra) mind-field

«fully illuminates an actual state or object (artha) that has be-
come real, has been realized,
«diminishes the afflictions and impurities (k/eshas),
«loosens the bonds of karma, and
«brings about the possibility of control (nirodha) face to face,
as it were.
Here we need to refer to the original Sanskrit words to explain
their purport.

Artha is a purpose, an aim, as well as an object of pursuit or of
concentration. In meditation reaching samprajfiadta samadhi (defined
in YS 1.17ff.) the concentration is so deep that the object itself
develops a mental reality as the flow of concentration remains
uninterrupted. The true nature of the object is then realized, and
consequently the very essence of that object, wherever it may be in
the universe, 1s completely mastered. This will be explained in
greater detail in Chapter 3.

An object of concentration has to be real (sad-bhiittam). VM
says that this eliminates a state like sleep, where there is intense
concentration, but on its own tamas with no illumination of any-
thing real.

Vyasa could have simply said dyorayati ‘illuminates’, but he
adds the prefix pra, resulting in pra-dyotayati ‘fully illuminates’.
This has a special significance. Objects are often illuminated in our
intelligence in the ordinary state of wakefulness; but that illumina-
tion is not complete. The mind is disturbed by rajas and sees the
objects in a distorted form. When a person with a diseased eye sees
the moon, the mind is pseudo-illuminated by that experience and
might be completely convinced that it is seeing two moons. All of
our senses are at all times unreliable. Any reality we perceive is
thus unreliable and not presented to us in its full form.

Similarly, the knowledge gained from inferential logic 1s an im-
paired one. It depends on data presented by unreliable, impaired,
SOTRA LI 85
imperfect, incomplete senses. How can arguments developed on
the basis of such indirect perception be reliable? What the logicians
call direct perception through the senses is an indirect perception
in the view of the yogis simply because (a) the multicoloured senses
intervene between the mind and the external objects; (b) the imper-
fect mind intercepts and reinterprets to the buddhi what has been
presented to it by the unreliable senses; and (c) the senses, mind
and buddhi all together conspire to present to the inner, reflecting
self a picture that is incomplete, incorrect, impaired and distorted.

In yoga epistemology, therefore, reality (sad or sat) is accurately
seen only by the inner self directly in concentration without the
intervention of the senses, mind and buddhi. It is this which the
yogis call direct perception (pratyaksha), and all schools of Indian
philosophy refer to it as yogi-pratyaksha. It is in samprajfiata
samadhi that such a direct perception (pratyaksha) occurs. This
alone is the full illumination expressed by pra-dyotayati.

Such a realization of the nature of reality vanquishes the five
afflictions (kleShas) (YS 11.3ff.). As these causes of bondage are
eliminated, that which binds the spiritual self with buddhi auto-
matically loses its glutinous strength. The causes of bondage are
loosened. They are no longer capable of producing the future effects
of any possible karma because the yogi has now risen above virtue
and vice (dharma and adharma). Through this process final freedom
from attachments (para-vairagya) ( YS 1.16) develops and one finally
sees the possibility of reaching asamprajfiata samadhi, that for
which all this was a preparation, that which is agin, the whole,
for which all these are avigas, supports, parts and means thereto.

The question arises that since samprajfidta samadhi has been
described as fourfold (YS 1.17ff.), accompanied with discursive
thought and so forth, does this indicate that the affliction (k/lesha)
called ignorance (avidyd) is still present? How can such a state be
called full illumination or realization? VB answers that the first
three stages of samprajfidta lead to the fourth and may be consi-
dered incorporated in it. In that fourth state arises the Truth-
bearing intuitive wisdom (rtambhara prajfia) (YS 1.48), and the
objection is thus overruled.
86 SOTRAII
But beyond the realization of cosmic realities through intense
concentration is asamprajfiata yoga, acognitive samadhi. Vyasa
says,
When all the modifications (vrttis) have come under control
(nirodha), then it 1s called acognitive (asamprajfidta) samadhi.
VB states that even the vrtti of the mind that is present in sampra-
jfidta samadhi needs to be brought to nirodha, rendered inoperative,
through the attainment of para-vairdgya (YS 1.6,18), and then
asamprajnata samadhi is reached. Nirodha is defined as that state
wherein
eany fresh impressions of the external world, its experiences, rela-
tionships and memories no longer arise,
ethe state of samadhi creates its own impressions on the soul’s
mental mantle, but
«the impressions left in the mind-field from past experiences still
remain.
It 1s the force of these past impressions that continues to create for
the yogi a physical reality, including the illness or health of the
body and its regular operations, until the continuously strengthened
samadhi-samskaras, the impressions of the samadhi being created
on the mind, finally burn out even the past sarnskaras. Then the
yogi 1s called a jivan-mukta, one who is liberated while yet in a
body, using the body out of benevolence for the benefit of others.
In other words, mirodha is not an absence of vrttis, says VB. It is
not a cessation or suppression, as many contemporary translators
mistakenly assert. If this were so, yoga would have to be defined as
a particular condition of the substratum of those vrttis, the sub-
stratum being the mind-field. Samadhi is not such a state of the
mind. In the actual experience of samadhi, the mind, being under
the control of the spiritual self, is not made blank. The mind may
continue to function according to its own nature. The yogi is not a
mindless being. His mind has become, however, an instrument
under his control. The modifications of the mind continue, but
SOTRA I.1 87
under his direction. Past sarhskaras remain operative at first until
only the nirodha-samskaras remain ( YS I11.9,10; IV.26).

As someone with a torch in hand finds the object he looked for,

and then abandons the torch, so, attaining knowledge through

spiritual awakening, one should leave the awakening behind.
(This passage has been quoted by VB from an unknown source
and a somewhat similar passage is to be found in Brahma-vidya
Upanishad, 36.) The word bodha is translated as “spiritual awak-
ening,” from the verb root budh ‘to awaken’, ‘to get to know’.
From the same verb is derived bodhi ‘a Buddha’s enlightenment’.
Bodha can also mean “a teaching or direction given.” This teaching
may be given by the guru or simply be the direction one finds from
one state to the next in the internal journey toward enlightenment.
Finally one abandons these means to enlightenment because tran-
scendental knowledge has dawned. Verse 5 of the Brahma-bindu
Upanishad reads:

One should attempt restraint (nirodha) only until it vanishes in

the heart. This is the extent of knowledge and liberation; the rest

1s all useless expanse of texts!

At this point VB takes up a challenge presumably presented by
followers of Vedanta and Buddhist philosophies. Before we go
further, let it be understood that Vedanta and Buddhism, like
yoga, can also be understood at two levels:

1 The experiential level, in which there can be no disagreement
with the yogis
2. The formal systems of philosophy
The discussion here centers around the formalities of the system.

Vedanta is regarded as the path of knowledge (jAdna). It is
jfana-yoga, the yoga of knowledge proper. Vedantic texts say that
liberation occurs through knowledge. Similarly, Buddhists regard
samadhi as a step towards wisdom or knowledge (pa/fifia) among
the “three jewels” consisting of
8&8 SOUTRAI1

sila: conduct

samadhi: concentration

pafifia: wisdom, knowledge

NBB starts by presenting the controversy concerning the path of
jfidna and yoga. He then attempts to reconcile the two by stating
that liberation (moksha) does occur through jfidna, but that yoga
is the means to jfid@na. In both commentaries, NB and NBB, Nagesha
takes a solid Vedanta position with respect to the nature of Brah-
man and believes that yoga is the means of eliminating ignorance
about that nature. The arguments of VB, BG, NB, and NBB as to
the difference or identity between the Sankhya purusha and the
Vedanta Brahman will not be presented in our discussions. The
commentators’ attempts to reconcile j#@na and yoga throughout
their works are important and are summarized here from VB’s
commentary.

He asks why one needs all this emphasis on nirodha of the
vrttis, when knowledge alone would suffice.

Through the observance of the angas of yoga, as impurities

diminish, knowledge is kindled till discrimination produces correct

wisdom.
YS IL 28
Obviously, knowledge and wisdom are the goals; and the avigas—
the eight limbs of yoga that include samprajfidta and asamprajfiata
samadhis—are the means thereto. It 1s impossible for the same
state or entity to be the cause (of knowledge) and the effect (as
final wisdom) simultaneously.

So, assuming at least that samprajfiata samadhi is the means of
knowledge and that asamprajfdta samadhi is the effect as knowl-
edge, one could also postulate another possibility: that samprajfidta
samadhi is the cause of knowledge by removing impediments in
the way of knowledge. This postulation is supported by YS 1.41,
which states that when the vrttis of the mind-field have diminished
as though the mind is pure like a crystal, then the mind becomes
one with (a) that which grasps (I-am-ness, the reflection of the
SOTRAI1 89
pure self in the buddhi), (4) the instruments of grasping (the aharh-
kara and senses, including mind), and (c) the objects grasped (the
gross and subtle elements, etc.); dwelling in them, the mind becomes
as of one colour with them. But asamprajfiata yoga will not be
regarded as a means of knowledge because it is produced by the
former, samprajfidta samadhi. Furthermore, continues the argument,
no additional means for liberation are needed once knowledge has
been produced.

To him (it appears), “I have delay only as long as I am not yet

liberated. Thereafter I shall prosper.”

Chhandogya Upanishad V1.14.2

It is obvious from these scriptural words that knowledge which is
totally independent of any other means or consideration is the
means for liberation. When ignorance, desires, acts and so forth
have ceased through the instrumentality of that knowledge, there is
no further cause for transmigration (samsdara), which finally ceases.
In other words, suggests the opponent, let us interpret the Yoga-
siitras in conformity with the demands of the Vedanta and Buddhist
philosophies and consider knowledge to be the goal. Let us consider
asamprajfiata samadhi to be that goal synonymous with knowledge
which Vedanta and Buddhist philosophies propose as the final
goal—the ultimate step to liberation. Many sitras of Patajfijali,
examples of which are quoted in this argument, can be interpreted
to support this view.

A proponent of the traditional interpretation of the Yoga-siitras
opposes such an interpretation and wishes to remain true to the
formalities of the system. He responds to his opponent by saying
that this, too, is the result of the two levels of samadhi: that pain,
which remains necessary because of past karmas and continues in
succeeding reincarnations, should cease when knowledge is attained.
As Vy4sa says in his commentary on YS 1.11, all these vrttis consist
of pleasure, pain and delusion; therefore all of them should be
brought under control (nirodha). Knowledge alone is not the means
to diminishing the power of karma. Yoga, which is samadhi, is
that means:
90 SOTRAL1

The yogi who has accomplished samadhi attains liberation in

that very life, his heap of karmas immediately burnt in the fire of

yoga.
Vishnu-purana V1.7.35
Numerous other texts support this view.

Like knowledge, asamprajfiata samadhi is a means of liberation
by elimination of karma. While samadhi has this in common with
knowledge, samadhi goes further. Asamprajfdta samadhi burns
out all past impressions (sarnskaras) and thereby eliminates the
effectiveness even of those karmas accumulated in previous lifetimes
which would otherwise have begun fruition, involving (a) the current
incarnation in a particular species, (b) the life span destined for
that incarnation, and (c) the pain and pleasure ordained for the life
span. This, called prarabdha, even though it may already have
begun, is all cancelled once asamprajhata samadhi has burned the
seeds of that prarabdha, whereas in the case of knowledge alone
one must wait for final liberation until all the past karmas have
fructified. Through yoga, as quoted above, the heap of karmas is
immediately burnt, whereas in the case of knowledge a waiting
period is implied by the quotation, “I have delay only as long as I
am not yet liberated.” Immediate liberation is the efficaciousness
of yoga. Its efficacy extends to the fact that pradrabdha karma,
from previous lives, 1s rendered ineffective.

There is no knowledge like that of Sankhya. There ts no strength
like that of yoga.
Mahabharata ( Moksha-dharma-parvan) 316.2
Here strength means the power to overcome the karma of former
lives.

Pain appears in the conscious principle, the spiritual self, only
through proximity of the chitta-vrttis. It is a condition by reason
of proximity (aupadhika) and not an innate quality. Obviously,
then, yoga, consisting of the control of these vrttis, is the best
means for that liberation defined as the cessation of pain. A con-
dition ceases when the entity from which the condition proceeds
ceases to be in proximity.
SOTRAI.1 91

So, knowledge is not opposed to yoga. Knowledge (jfidna), re-
nunciation (vairdgya), and the diminution of karmic force (karma-
Shaya) are efficacious in total permanent eradication of pain only
through that ultimate means defined as the nirodha of vrttis. The
total and permanent nirodha of vrttis occurs only in asamprajfata
samadhi, in which sarnskaras are totally eliminated and the mind-
field is dissolved into the original equilibrium of prakrti, whereupon
final liberation (moksha) ensues.

Samprajfidta samadhi, being simply the foundation for asam-
prajfiata samadhi, may be called a means to liberation; but the
direct means thereto is asamprajfiata samadhi itself, as indicated
by Vydsa in his commentary on YS 1.3 and as substantiated in
other scriptures, such as:

Liberation means to abandon the state as though one were some
other, and to dwell in the identity of one’s own nature.
Bhagavata-purana 11.10.6
Liberation, then, is simply the spiritual self dwelling in its own
nature.

Taking a slightly different approach, which is accepted by all
others later in the work, NTC reiterates the well-known tradition
of Vedanta that knowledge is gained through learning (Shravana),
contemplating (manana) and meditating (nididhyasana). This ni-
didhyadsana is the same as samadhi. Narayana Tirtha (NT) is a
devout theist whose personal path is that of bhakti within the
teachings of Vallabhacharya. Devotion and surrender (bhakti) to a
personal God according to Vallabha’s version of Vedanta is NT’s
basic approach throughout the Yoga-siutras. Though declaring his
adherence to theistic Vedanta, he begins his commentary (NTC) by
paying homage to the sages of all traditions He does not try to
reconcile contradictions of philosophies but asserts that all the
various yogas, such as

advaita-yoga yoga of non-duality

bhakti-yoga: yoga of devotion and surrender to a personal God

brahma-yoga: yoga of Brahman

charya-yoga yoga of denominational ritual devotions
92 SUTRALI

dhyana-yoga: yoga of meditation

hatha-yoga: physical yoga within the context of interior, subtle

forces

jfiana-yoga: yoga of knowledge

karma-yoga: yoga of action

kriya-yoga: yoga of ascetic practices ( YS II.1)

lakshya-yoga: yoga of practising concentration on a target

laya-yoga: yoga of dissolution

mantra-yoga: yoga of the practice of mantras

prema-bhakti-yoga: yoga of love and devotion

Shiva-yoga: yoga of Shiva

siddhi-yoga: yoga of siddhis (accomplishments of powers)

vasana-yoga: yoga of directing hidden propensities
are included in the eight limbs (arigas) of yoga. Throughout his
larger commentary, Yoga-siddhanta-chandrika, he attempts to prove
this view.
SOTRA 12 93
Sitra 1.2 arateaeragratryed:
yogash chitta-vytti-nirodhah
yogah: yoga (is)
chitta-: (of) mind-field
vrtti-: (of) operations, activities, fluctuations, modifications
nirodhah: control, dissolution
Yoga is the control of the modifications of the mind-field.
Vyasa’s Commentary

This siitra was enunciated with the intent to state the definition
of that (yoga).

[Satra-] Yoga is the control of the modifications of the mind-field.
Because the word “all” is not included to suggest “all operations of
the mind-field,” it implies that samprajfidta also is included in
yoga. The mind-field has three dispositions: illumination (pra-khya
from sattva), endeavour (pra-vrtti from rajas) and stasis (sthiti
from tamas); which leads to the inference that the mind-field is
constituted of the three attributes (gunas).

The nature of the sattva of the mind-field (chitta-sattva) is illum-
ination; in contact with rajas and tamas it loves sovereignty (aish-
varya) and sensuous objects. The same mind-field, when pierced by
tamas alone, comes to unrighteousness (a-dharma), ignorance (a-
Jfiana), lack of dispassion (a-vairdgya) and loss of sovereignty (an-
aiShvarya).

Again, when the obscuration by delusion has diminished from
the mind-field, it shines in its fulness and in all directions; when
this is pierced by a measure of rajas, it turns towards virtue (dharma),
knowledge (yidna), dispassion (vairdgya) and sovereignty (aishvarya).

When the impurity of the last vestige of rajas has been eliminated,
the mind-field becomes established in its own nature. This state
comprises only the discernment of the separateness of the sattva of
the mind-field, the faculty of discrimination (buddhi) on the one
94 SUTRA I2

hand and the consciousness principle (purusha) on the other, thus
reaching up to dharma-megha, the samadhi of the raincloud of
virtue and of the knowledge of the nature of all things.

The consciousness-potentia (chiti-Shakti) is immutable, unmov-
ing, not transferable. The objects are shown to her, while she her-
self is pure as well as endless. The state of discernment between
buddhi and the consciousness-potentia is of the nature of sattva,
and is a product of sattva. This illumination of discernment is
opposite to the consciousness-potentia. Consequently, the mind-
field, which has become dispassionate towards this discernment,
brings even that discernment under control. The mind in that state
is absorbed in sarhskaras alone. That is the seedless (nir-bija) sama-
dhi. Nothing more is cognized there; hence it is called acognitive
(asamprajfiata).

That yoga, the control of the modifications of the mind-field, is
thus twofold.

Discussion

This is a Jakshana-sitra or nirdesha-siitra, an aphorism defining
yoga. Vyasa’s commentary also states the bheda, the two divisions
of that yoga.

In the yoga system of psychology there is a term antah-karana,
meaning “the inner instrument,” which is the eleventh sense, in
addition to the five active and the five cognitive senses. This antah-
karana, or the psyche, is divided into four faculties according to
function.

manas: the active mind that receives sensations from the senses
and sends forth reactions to them

buddhi: the twofold faculty of discrimination, with its
«outward face, the intellect, and
«inward face, the intuitive wisdom

ahamkara: ego, the faculty by which the personality establishes
its identity, such as “I am this body”

chutta; the entire mind-field, including the universal and individ-
ual unconscious, as well as manas, buddhi and ahamkara
SOTRAL2 95

The sitra states:
Yoga is the control of the modifications of the mind-field.

VB explains that the word chitta in this siitra does not signify only
one of the above four faculties but the entire antah-karana. It is
the substratum of its vrttis, that in which the functions take place,
that in which the waves arise. It is also that very substratum into
which the vrttis dissolve, that is, go into dissolution (Jaya).

Yoga is the nirodha of the operations (vrttis) of the mind-field.
The mind-field is a mutation (parin@ma) of sattva, which is the
purest aspect of prakrti. The waves of fluctuations (vrttis) that
arise in this field are part of that very mutation.

This siitra may also be translated as follows:

Yoga is the dissolution of vrttis into their origin in the mind-field.
In some well-known translations the word nirodha has been ren-
dered as “suppression” (Woods, Taimni) or “restriction” (Feuerstein).
Nothing can be further from the intent of Patafijali and Vyasa.
Nirodha is neither suppression nor restriction, nor even absence.
Here we refer the reader to the discussion on pp. 86ff. To under-
stand the word nirodha, one needs to comprehend the entire
Sankhya scheme of evolution and involution, particularly the latter,
which will be explained in the discussion on Sitra II.19. The last
sutra of the Yoga-siitras (1V.34) defines isolation or liberation (kai-
valya) as

gunadnam prati-prasavah ‘the return of the gunas into their causes’,
which means that (RY on YS IV.34)

the sarhskdras dissolve into the mind, mind into asmuta, asmua

into mahat or buddhi, and buddhi into gunas.
BG also on YS 1V.34 explains this to mean
96 SOTRAI2
the dissolution of gunas into their cause, the prakriti, when they
have been brought to the state of linga-body.
YS 1V.32 also supports this view that the ultimate state of gunas
arrives when all of the evolutes have already served their purpose
insofar as the spiritual self is concerned and are of no further use.
They cease to evolve or cease to continue in the state of disequilib-
rium. They then dissolve into prakriti, never again to show their
faces to the spiritual self, who has reached isolation. What has
been stated as the final goal in the siitra explaining the fruit, goal,
end result, of yoga (phala-siitra) (IV.34) is also supported by this
sttra of definition (Jakshana-siitra) (1.2). According to VB on this
sitra,
nirodha of the vrttis of the fourfold inner sense (antah-karana)
means their dissolution (Jaya), which 1s a particular state of their
substratum, the mind. Such Jaya is yoga. It 1s not the absence of
vrttis, because that does not fit the idea of a state of the substratum.
BR comments:
The vrttis are the parts (anga) of the whole (angin), which 1s the
mind-field (chitta). Yoga means mrodha, that is, their dissolution
(Jaya) into their original cause when their outward transmutation
ceases and the process of mutation 1s reversed.
Thus the effects of the gunas are dissolved back into their respective
causes until the process of gradual nirodha leads the gunas to
dissolve finally into the original prakrti, at which point the isolation
of the spiritual self occurs.
NB concurs.
Yoga 1s the mirodha, turning back, of the vrttis This turning
back 1s a particular endeavour which 1s supersensual, like the
endeavor [of the mind to serve] as a source of the continuity of
life-processes. This endeavour consists of conscious control (m-
graha) of the mind-field, and causes the dissolving (vi-/aya) of the
vrttis
SOTRAI.2 97

Lest the reader confuse this concept of dissolving with the idea
of rendering the vrttis non-existent, he needs to grasp the Sankhya
theory of causation known as sat-ka@rya-vada. This theory is suc-
cinctly presented in the Bhagavad-gité (11.16):

That which is not, does not come into being; that which is, never

ceases to be.

The entities are transformed according to the attributes present
within themselves, but there is never one speck of energy or entity
more or less than there ever was or will be. This theory, stated by
the founders of the Sankhya system nearly three thousand years
before the modern laws of thermodynamics, is the foundation of
the Sankhya view of causation. Nothing that ever exists goes into
non-existence; it simply becomes unmanifest, the form returning to
dwell as an attribute hidden in its cause, whence it originally arose
and from which it may emerge again.

This definition of nirodha as dissolution of vrttis into their source
in the mind-field is confirmed by the intent implicit in many state-
ments throughout the siitras and explicit in their commentaries.
For example, YS 11.27 lists the seven grounds which the yogi
attains and then leaves behind. Just before the seventh ground,
isolation (moksha) or liberation (kaivalya), we read in Vydsa’s
commentary the description of the sixth:

The gunas, like rocks falling from the peak of a mountain,
(crumbling and) finding no more resting place, are facing dissolu-
tion into their cause. Together with that cause (prakrti), they are
no longer produced into effects again, because they are of no
further purpose to the spiritual self.
By this Vyasa means that they are of no further purpose insofar as
the individual self who is reaching isolation or liberation 1s con-
cerned (YS 11.22).

In this context, the reader is advised to study the Yoga-sitra
discussions in the following sequence: I1.19, 1.2, 1.19, 1.45, 11.22,
11.26-27, 1V.32 and 1V.34.
98 SUTRA 12
Vyisa’s second sentence clarifies the definition of yoga:

Because the word “all” is not included to suggest “all modifications

of the mind-field,” it implies that samprajfiata also is included in

yoga.

The external vrttis are the valid proof, etc. enumerated in YS 1.6.
But how can their control be the definition of yoga as samadhi,
when sattvic vrttis of the objects of concentration still remain in
samprajfidata samadhi? The answer is that the siitra does not say
the control of all vrttis. In samprajfidta the rajasic and tamasic
vrttis are under control, and so the wider definition applies. If the
sitra had said all vrttis, then the definition would have been limited
to asamprajfiata. \n the earlier stages of samprajfidta there remain
objects of concentration, and its final stage is marked as the dis-
cernment of the difference between the mental personality and the
spiritual self. In asamprajfidta there is not even the awareness of
this discernment or difference.

The concept of nirodha is explained in various ways by the
different commentators. BR and AD say that nirodha, control of
vrttis, occurs when the mind’s constant alteration through its in-
volvement with external experiences ceases; the mind 1s then turned
inwards and consequently the waves (vrttis), as part of that very
mutation or alteration, are dissolved into their origin.

NTC explains the traditional Sankhya-yoga classifications and
states that the mind-field (chitta) divided into the faculty of dis-
crimination (mahat or buddhi), ego (ahamkara) and mind (manas)
constitutes the inner sense (antah-karana). The vrttis are mutations
of condition (avastha-parimadma), like a flame from a candle, and
are of two kinds, internal (@bhyantara) and external (bahya). NTC
does not define these, but presumably the internal ones are those
that arise from the sarhskaras and those which guide the awareness
inwards. The external ones, then, are those that are produced from
sense experiences as well as those which lead the awareness outwards.
Pacification or blowing out (upa-shama) of vrttis is nirodha, which
means merger or dissolution (/aya) into their cause. Nirodha may
be defined, then, as that state in which all the vrttis of the mind-
SOTRAI.2 99
field are restrained. When the mind is free from disturbance of the
vrttis, it may be held in the Supreme Self (parama-atman) and be
made one with Him. A yogi who has attained this state is therefore
called “joined in yoga” (voga-yukta) (NTC).

NB also states that nirodha means to return the vrttis into their
origin. This is a supernatural (atindriya) endeavour, like the main-
tenance of the life functions, which does not occur through the
efforts of the conscious mind or the senses. Nirodha means that
the residual impressions (YS 1.18) of the vrttis cease to wax and
wane; they no longer cause highs and lows but are rendered inoper-
ative and ineffective; the tides of constant alterations and mutations
no longer arise. Nirodha cannot be translated as suppression, cessa-
tion or absence of vrttis, says NB, on two grounds:

1. In samprajfiata samadhi vrttis remain as explained above.

2. An absence is inoperative. It can produce nothing; it can
leave no impressions (sathskaras). In YS 1.50 and III.9 it is
stated or implied that samadhi creates its sarnskaras on the
mind. Without the constant and continuous increase in the
strength of such sarhskadras, the momentum of mind’s incli-
nation and progress towards the higher ground would be
unlikely.

Therefore, briefly, in the following order of development,
nirodha is

«turning the mind away from external involvements to the inward
pursuit.

«dissolving the rajasic and tamasic vrttis into their guna origina-
tion within the mind-field, so that

ethe tide of samskaras no longer waxes and wanes; con-
sequently

«discernment of the distinction between the spiritual self and
buddhi occurs, and

«samadhi leaves its own samsk4ras on the mind-field.

«finally, in asamprajfata, having the self dwell in the self (YS I 3)
When an accomplished meditator who has reached asamprayridta
opens his eyes to the world, all the vrttis, all the operations and
modifications of the mind-field, are under the control of his
volition.
100 SOTRAI2
Now to explain Vydsa’s statement:

The mind-field has three dispositions: illumination, endeavour

and stasis; which leads to the inference that it is constituted of

three attributes (gunas).
The commentators, studying Vydsa’s statement regarding the various
mental dispositions produced by the three gunas, have included in
their discussions the five levels (bhiimis) named in the exposition
of Sitra 1. We follow the same traditional scheme even at the risk
of repeating some of what was already explained in the last siitra.

VM asks: How is it possible that a single entity, the mind-field,
has all these different levels of agitation? The answer lies in the fact
that it is a compound entity constituted of the three gunas. This
one single mind-field goes through many conditions because it is
composed of the three gunas whose disequilibrium produces conflict
among them and results in one subduing the others and vice versa,
so that the alternations and mutations of the mental states (pari-
namas) occur. More about the parinamas will be discussed in the
commentaries on YS III.9-15.

Why did Vyasa begin enumerating the five states under Sitra |
with rajas of the agitated (kKshipra) state, whereas the normal order
in the texts is sattva, rajas, tamas? BR answers that unless you first
show initiative and activity, you cannot state anything about its
stupefaction through tamas or its pacification in sattva. Sattva is
shown last because through it one rises to the final, higher grounds
of the “concentrated” in samprajfiata and “controlled” in asampraj-
Yiata. In the “concentrated,” the externalized waves cease. In the
“controlled,” all the waves, as well as the residual impressions of
past waves, are also dissolved.

Again, Vy4sa says,

The nature of the sattva of the mind-field (chitta-sattva) 1s
illumination; in contact with rayas and tamas it loves sovereignty
and sensuous objects. The same mind-field, when pierced by tamas
alone, comes to unrighteousness, ignorance, lack of dispassion
and loss of sovereignty.
SOTRAI.2 101
Again, when the obscuration by delusion has diminished from
the mind-field, it shines in its fulness and in all directions; when
this is pierced by a measure of rajas, it turns towards virtue,
knowledge, dispassion and sovereignty.
The word chitta-sattva means sattva that has taken the form of the
mind-field. The presence of sattva, the purest aspect, inclines one
towards
dharma: righteousness, virtues such as non-violence
jfiana: wisdom that arises from yoga
vairdgya: dispassion and control over desires for worldly or
otherworldly pleasures ( YS 1.15)
aiShvarya: sovereignty and spiritual freedom
These four, according to Sankhya-karika 23, are the natural attri-
butes of sattvic buddhi. Of these, the term aishvarya ‘sovereignty’
has been given special attention by the commentators. Sovereignty
is defined as “the will not being thwarted in any area”; the loss of
sovereignty implies that one’s will is thwarted by many impediments.
The word aishvarya is an abstract noun formed from ishvara ‘the
lord’, here not in the sense of God, but rather in a human sense of
power, a lordship, a commanding presence, the ability to be effec-
tive, to be in control of things. Of course, according to the yoga
philosophy, one cannot be in control of things without first being
in control of all one’s faculties and abilities and states. The word
iShvara is derived from the verb root ish, meaning “to have power
over,” “to have control over,” “to be able to (create, control, direct).”
The presence of sattva gives one the clearsightedness so as to enjoy
such lordship and effectiveness.

The absence of sattva and the dominance of tamas robs the
mind-field of such clarity, and consequently effectiveness in wielding
power is lost This does not mean that one who wields power
unrighteously is also endowed with sattva. Unrighteousness 1s a
symptom of tamas, and it 1s only righteous effectiveness in wielding
power which marks the presence of sattva. When sattva is weakened,
one becomes dependent, no longer a sovereign.
102. SOTRAI.2

In the statement that the mind-field has illumination, initiative
and stability as a result of the presence of the three gunas, it must
be understood that the list is not exhaustive. Illumination entails
all kinds of knowledge, but it is only symbolic, an example (upa-
lakshana) of the qualities that are symptomatic of the presence of
sattva. Others, such as a pleasant state of mind resulting in pleasant-
ness of character (prasdda-guna), lightness, love, lovingness, etc.
are to be understood as included. (See also the discussion on Si-
tras 1.16, I.33ff.). In the case of rajasic qualities, not only will
(volition leading to action) but also anguish, grief and such others
are to be understood. The word “stasis” (sthiti) to express the
attribute of tamas means both “stability” and “stagnation.” It sig-
nifies also the veiling of the force of sarnskaras, which would nor-
mally produce action from rajas. By sthiti are exemplified other
qualities, like heaviness, obscuration, dejection or feebleness.

VB explains illumination, initiative and stability as follows: Ilu-
mination (khyati or pra-khya@) is the knowledge of reality (tattva-
jfiana), and this is meant to include all sattvic qualities attendant
thereupon. Worldly inclination or initiative (pra-vrtti) means action
(karma), and is meant to include all rajasic qualities. Stability or
stagnation (sthiti) means the cessation of the activities such as the
vrttis in a state like sleep. This is meant to include all tamasic
qualities. Even though this explanation may appear plausible at
first glance, it later proves to be untenable, for if illumination
means the realization of reality, that would limit the sattvic functions
of the mind-field to dharma-megha samadhi. If sleep is the cessa-
tion of all vrttis, how can sleep itself be included among the vrttis,
as it has been in Patafijali’s scheme? MA and VB say, however,
that in any case the cessation of vrttis in the sleep state? should not
—- student ts advised here to note that in Sanskrit there are two different words for

eee the sleep state as different from or contrasted with wakefulness and
nidr@ the vptt: itself, that modification of mind which causes the sleep state to
ensue or to continue
The philosophical and psychological distinction between the two should be remembered in
any further references to sleep, and the student should check to determine whether sushuptt
asa state or nidr@ as a vrtti is being referred to
SOTRAI2 103
be confused with samprajfidta samadhi, because it does not lead to
the elimination of afflictions (kleshas).

VM says that in the mind-field when rajas and tamas are a little
less powerful than sattva but are of mutually equal strength, the
person loves sovereignty—that is, independence, power, success
and effectiveness—and obtains these. He is also drawn to the aes-
thetic enjoyments of various sensuous pleasures.

NB expresses it differently: When rajas and tamas are equal in
strength and dominated by and serving sattva, it is then that a
person is attracted to yogic accomplishments or so-called miracu-
lous powers (siddhis) as well as to sensual objects; this is the agi-
tated, kshipta, state. When tamas is eliminated and sattva is mingled
with a little rajas, then the mind turns to virtue, knowledge, dispas-
sion and sovereignty; this is the distracted, vikshipta, state. Vi-
kshipta is so called because it is somewhat kshipta but sometimes
manages to attain stability. It is also the mind of celestial beings as
well as of seekers (jijfidsu) who are being thwarted by the obstacles
(vikshepas) which are explained in YS 1.30 (AD).

VM says that when sattva is powerful, the person is inclined
towards concentration on true reality (tattva). But a little obscura-
tion of sattva by tamas causes him to think that the eight siddhis
(YS 111.45), yogic accomplishments, such as the power to become
minute, are the true aim, the reality, which one had started out to
pursue. When rajas now begins to affect the mind in that state, one
is unable to maintain a hold even of the means to the attainment
of siddhis; the mind merely loves them but is unable to accomplish
them. It remains attracted only to the sensuous experiences, such
as beautiful sounds, etc., which are its natural objects. These are
the distractions of the sattvic mind by tamas and rajas (vikshepas).

As we have seen, the very interesting observation 1s made by
VM, VB and NB that the state of agitation (kshipta) is that in
which one thinks of the yogic accomplishments (siddhis) as the
desirable goals and is drawn towards them. This seems to contra-
dict the intent of Patafijali and Vyasa, who said that the kshipta
state is not at alla part of yoga, whereas the siddhis are a result of
the practice of the threefold internal limbs of yoga (samyama). An
104° SUTRA 12

attraction towards siddhis, etc. may be considered a distraction
(vikshepa), the third ground, but not kshipta or a simple agitation
of an ordinarily worldly mind.

BR explains: The agitated, disturbed state develops because of
the predominance of rajas. When the mind is impelled by rajas, it
becomes unsteady, outward rather than inward, drawn towards
near or distant, alternating objects of pain and pleasure. Such a
mind is of the demonic beings called daityas and danavas. When
tamas waxes, the mind becomes somnolent (miidha), unable to
distinguish between right or wrong acts, fixated on conflicts through
anger and the like. Such is the mind of the demonic beings called
rakshasas and pishachas. AD says also that the agitated (Kshipta)
mind resulting from overpowering rajas belongs to demonic beings
and to those who are frenzied with the pride of wealth. The tamasic
mind belongs to ghoul-like beings and to those who are inebriated
(AD). When sattva is on the rise, then the mind prevents and
avoids the causes of pain and is inclined towards the means of
pleasure, of sensuousness, such as lovely sounds. Such is the dis-
tracted (vikshipta) mind of the celestial beings called the devas.

The mind undertakes an initiative because of rajas. Through
tamas it is drawn to malevolence towards others. Sattva brings it
pleasantness and pleasure. What impels the mind to move in the
direction of righteousness (dharma), etc.? It is the presence of a
little rajas. The mind, being a composition of three gunas, can
never be without rajas or tamas. It is not, then, that rajas and
tamas are to be eliminated, but rather that they are essential and
their measure (md@rr@) is ideally just sufficient to fulfil the purpose
of sattva When present within the limit of this measure, rajas
initiates virtue, etc., and tamas imparts stability.

Vyasa says.
Again, when the obscuration by delusion has diminished from
the mind-field, it shines in its fulness and in all directions; when
this 1s pierced by a measure of rajas, it turns towards virtue,
knowledge, dispassion and sovereignty.
As VM explains, all movement, energy and initiative is of rajas. It
is not intended that mind become devoid of rajas. It is not possible
SOTRA IL2 105
to achieve this. All material entities, the mind being no exception,
are composites of the three gunas. The absence of any one of the
three is impossible in any object, entity or experience. What is
intended by the discipline of yoga is simply purification of mind so
that tamas and rajas may be brought under the power of sattva.
AD says that at first, one who is in the vikshipta state of mind can
practise control (nirodha) of rajasic and tamasic vrttis alone by
replacing them with sattvic ones. When the veils of tamas, which
delude the mind, are withdrawn from the face of sattva, and rajas,
being in lesser proportion than sattva, serves the sattva in turn, the
mind is impelled to go towards righteousness, knowledge and dis-
passion (vairagya) (YS 1.12,15,16), and through these to sovereignty.
Such a person, according to Vyasa, shines in fulness and in all
directions. What is meant by “fulness in all directions” is that all
the states of matter (prakrti), the various divisions or segments of
the twenty-three evolutes of matter, are illuminated to such a mind.

VB explains the same “illumination all around” to mean that the
mind-field becomes filled with vrttis concerning all the objects of
experience—especially of concentration—by taking their form, thus
comprehending them fully with no aspect left in concealment. A
mental experience simply means that the mind-field has taken the
form of the object being experienced. This applies not only to the
minds of individual human beings but also to those universal beings
who work with the universal mind to control and direct their
bodies that are the universes. It is thus that the mind of beings
such as Hiranya-garbha, touched by the residue of the universal
rajas, impels them to direct the world towards virtue, etc.

According to VM, when tamas is stronger than rajas, it van-
quishes rajas, whereupon the initiative of rajas fails to remove the
veil of tamas from the mind-field. Then the mind turns towards
vice, unrighteousness and such other inclinations. Ignorance (a-
jfiana) in this context means not the absence of knowledge but
rather (a) perversive cognition (viparyaya) as defined in YS 1.8,
and (bd) sleep, that is, resorting to the concept of negation as defined
in YS 1.10. This 1s the stupefied state. In this context AD says that
even though kshipta and miadha in a sense annul each other, it 1s
106 SOTRA 12
not conducive to transcendental attainment; their mutual cancelling
is not a form of nirodha.
Returning to Vyasa:
When the impurity of the last vestige of rajas has been eliminated,
the mind-field becomes established in its own nature.
The word chitta (mind-field) should not be confused with chiti,
which is the absolute and eternal power called consciousness (chiti-
Shakti). The latter, being immutable, cognizes nothing external;
only the faculty of discrimination (buddhi) in which vrttis arise
ever does so. NB further explains: It is established under YS IV.16
and 17 that there is no such thing as an individual mind. The
mind-field is one and all-pervading. It appears individuated when
operative within a single personality. Thus the all-pervading mind
is capable of apprehending all objects at all times. It is only when
veiled by the presence of tamas that it fails to do so. When the
tamasic impulses that lead the mind astray to objects other than
those of concentration are purged, the mind automatically and
effortlessly becomes centered on the object of concentration. This
is samprajnata.
Vyasa says:
This state comprises only the discernment of the separateness of
the sattva of the mind-field, the faculty of discrimination (buddhi)
on the one hand and the conscious principle (purusha) on the
other
To reach this stage the personality needs to burn in the dual fire of
practice and dispassion (abhydasa and vairagya) (YS 1.12). Thereby
the impurities of rajas and tamas are cleansed. Here the buddh,
which 1s the pure sattva of mind-field, becomes as purified as gold,
dwelling in its own nature. This is not to be confused with the
spiritual self dwelling in its own nature, as enunciated in YS 1.3.
When the buddhi faculty dwells in its own nature, it is no longer
being fed on the experiences of senses and their objects. It acts
independently of them, separated from them through the process
SOTRAI.2 107
of withdrawal of the senses (pratya@hara) (YS 11.54). Yet all of
buddhi’s functions are not yet completed. It has one final service
still to perform for the spiritual self (purusha). In the buddhi
awakens viveka-khydati, the discernment of the distinction between
itself and the spiritual self. The mental personality here recognizes
the source of its illumination as being the spiritual self and ceases
to identify sentience merely with body, senses and mind.

VB explains further the relationship of sarmprajfiata samadhi
and the experience of viveka-khyati by saying that discernment
does not occur in the first two stages of samprajfata, which are
accompanied by the discursive and the subtle thought respectively,
and where mind and buddhi still have some “other” as the objects.
Only from the third stage onwards, when the mind-field and buddhi
are centered upon themselves, does the discernment begin. When
one speaks of samprajfiata as the state in which the discernment of
viveka-khya@ti occurs it should be understood that the first two
stages of samprajfiata are included only as supportive to the final
two, only as the means to the latter two, and are not by themselves
experiences of such discernment.

According to VB, this viveka-khy4ti, illuminative of all the vir-
tues and of the knowledge of the nature of all things, is not a
spiritual entity but rather a quality of buddhi, or it even embraces
the totality of buddhi, which is an unconscious principle made of
matter or prakrti and filled with the impurities of pain and pleasure.
Like a candle flame illuminating objects, it illuminates experiences.
Viveka-khyat: is the separation of buddhi from purusha, and Vyasa
says:

thus reaching up to dharma-megha, the samadhi of the raincloud

of virtue and of the knowledge of the nature of all things
Naturally, then, the meditation moves on to the dharma-megha
state. It 1s not yet self-realization. It is only the buddhi’s recognition
of the difference. In dharma-megha samadhi all the virtues dawn,
and the nature of all things in the universe becomes known; yet it
is still not the self dwelling in the self.
108 SOTRA 1.2

Although viveka-khydati is the highest state expounded on so far,
it is so only in comparison with the false identifications formerly
established. Vyasa then proceeds from this ground and says that
viveka-khyati is just as undesirable as all the former grounds, which
have been left behind, and that one must go further to chiti-shakti
because when a person has slept enough, he wakes; when one has
tasted refined sugar, he considers the unrefined to be coarse. So
the yogi ceases to be interested in this viveka-khydati and reaches
for the higher dispassion (para-vairdgya).

VM says that this so far explains the character of the madhu-
bhumika and prajfia-jyotis, the yogis at the middle ground, the
second and third category of yogis described on pp. 77-78.

Then Vydsa continues further to explain the mental state of the
fourth category of yogis, atikranta-bhavaniya, described on p. 78,
which is related to the acognitive samadhi (asamprajfiata), to un-
derstand which one needs to grasp the nature of the consciousness-
potentia (chiti-Shakti). In asamprajfiata one becomes aware of the
causes from which the bondage of transmigration (samsdra) begins.
Seeing the pain of these transmigrations, one develops distaste
towards worldly attractions. However, when discernment at the
buddhi level has occurred, the wise meditator finds that even this
does not suffice to sunder the hold of the three-stranded gunas of
prakrti. (Vyasa’s sentence defining chiti-Shakti seems to be a para-
phrase of a sentence of Acharya Pafichashikha, one of the early
founders of the Sankhya philosophy, which is given in the discus-
sion of YS 11.20.) But here the student is advised to reread Vyasa’s
passage:

The consciousness-potentia (chiti-Shakti) 1s immutable, unmov-

ing, not transferable. The objects are shown to her, while she

herself 1s pure as well as endless The state of discernment between

buddhi and the consciousness-potentia is of the nature of sattva,

and 1s a product of sattva This illumination of discernment 1s

opposite to the consciousness-potentia.

VB explains mutation or alteration to mean the cessation of one
quality and the rise of another in the same substratum. Such muta-
SOTRAI2 109
tion is not possible in chiti-shakti, which, free of such mutation,
remains absolute, the transcendental reality (param4artha-satya).
This consciousness (chiti) must not be mistaken as a quality, but is
rather an entity whose very form or nature is light (praka@sha).

According to the tradition, this potentia (Shakti) is that very
potent one (purusha). Consciousness is that very consciousness
principle, the spiritual self. The chiti-shakti is not apart from puru-
sha. The spiritual self is a being of pure energy (Shakti). (Refer to
pp. 119-20 for information concerning the genders of these terms.)

To understand the nature of the purity of Shakti it is well to see
how VM explains the meaning of impurity. Pleasure, pain and
delusion that arise respectively from sattva, rajas and tamas are the
impurity. Even pleasure and delusion cause pain to the discerning
sage and are to be avoided as being painful in their essence (YS
11.15). Even the most beautiful object causes pain when one thinks
of its finiteness in time, that it will cease to be. This impurity and
finiteness are not attributes of purusha. Vyasa says,

She herself is pure as well as endless.

A question arises: How can she be pure when she apprehends the
objects of senses, such as sounds, which are pleasant, painful or
delusionary? Apprehension means taking on their nature, being
coloured by them, being transformed somewhat into their being;
this certainly could not be regarded as purity. Furthermore, if she
goes through these alterations of taking on their form and aban-
doning them, going through such transience, how could she be
called endless and infinite? The answer is, as the student may read
again in Vyasa:

The objects are shown to her.

It is not that chiti-Shakti is transformed into transient forms and
experiences, but rather that the buddhi takes on their forms and
presents this transformed face to the spiritual self—the self whose
power of consciousness, being reflected onto the mirror surface of
110 SOTRAI.2
the buddhi, has enabled the buddhi to develop a semblance of
awareness.

Chiti-gshakti does not reach out to buddhi, is not transmitted on
to something else, is not a part of the scheme of evolution, is not
one of the evolutes of prakrti. When the buddhi presents the tran-
sient transformations of itself to the view of purusha, the latter is
not affected by the view, because this principle is immutable. The
possible mutations that occur in other entities are described in YS
III.9-15. Purusha’s freedom from mutation in spite of what is pre-
sented by the buddhi is explained in YS IV.18, but here Vyasa
says:

Consequently, the mind-field, which has become dispassionate

towards this discernment, brings even that discernment under

control. The mind in that state is absorbed in samskaras alone.

That is the seedless samadhi. Nothing more is cognized there;

hence it is called acognitive (asamprajnata).

As one reaches self-realization, there develops a higher dispassion
(para-vairadgya) (YS 1.16), because of which one becomes disin-
terested even in viveka-khy4@ti, the earlier discernment that leads to
dharma-megha samadhi. Now one reaches the final nirodha, where
seedless (nir-bija) samadhi occurs. In this nirodha, the mind-field
flows quietly (YS 111.10). Here the sarnskdras that would give birth
to a future chitta in a karmic process are burnt to ashes. Only
when nirodha leads to such burning does it become an instrument
of blocking any future afflictions (k/eshas) and the resultant storage
of karma (karmashaya) that develops into assuming the incarnation
in a species, life span during the incarnation, and pain and pleasure
during the life span. These now cease, because their very seed is
burnt out, no more karmas and their sarnskdras are to be gathered.
This is the seedless samadhi, as well as the goal that is explained in
Sitra 1.3.

It would appear that some of the commentators (@charyas) on
the Yoga-sitras did not fully understand either Patafijali or Vyasa.
Here we take issue with VB and others who paraphrase his words
(e.g., NG, NBB) concerning their statements, which are basically as
SOTRAI2 111
follows: “Some of our contemporaries claiming to be Vedantins
believe that even in asamprajfiata there continues to be self-knowl-
edge, which is non-discursive (nir-vikalpa) awareness in the form
of a vrtti of buddhi fixed on the self’s own nature (sva-rijpa). This
is completely unauthentic, for we read in Markandeya purana I11.45
and other texts:

The yogi should conquer the three guyas, and join himself to the
Supreme Self; making the self absorbed in That, he should aban-
don even the vrtti of consciousness.

It is known that in the union with the Lord there is an absence of

vrttis. The non-discursive (nir-vikalpa) self-knowledge exists only

during samprajfdta, when that samadhi reaches the absence of the
discursive thought of word, meaning and signification.”

In other words, says VB, asamprajfiata (acognitive) samadhi is
called so because there is no cognition of any kind in that state.
Obviously, here VB has missed the following points:

1. Vyasa’s commentary on this siitra says that the mind-field be-
comes established in its own nature. This statement should not
be confused with the purport of YS 1.3. The statement here
explains the state of the mind-field in asamprajfidta, whereas YS
1.3 explains the spiritual self becoming established in its own
nature in asamprajnata.

2. The awareness in the mind is a vrtti, a mutation, but the self-
awareness of the consciousness principle is an immutable con-
stant. It is not at all in the same category as the mental fluctu-
ations. The whole point of asamprajfiata is to dwell in the self-
nature, which is nothing if not self-aware.

3. The Sankhya philosophy on which the edifice of the yoga sys-
tem is built regards purusha to be a conscious principle (Sankhya-
karika 11). 1f VB is right, then what would happen to the con-
sciousness of the very chiti-shakti? The seer is the very power,
the entity, the energy of seeing, the very consciousness whom
VB wants to proclaim unconscious in asamprajfidta samadhi!
112, SUTRA 12
In short, VB’s statement and argument contradict the intent and
the content of YS 1.3, 1.51 and IV.34 and should be ignored.

Vyasa closes his commentary on this siitra by reiterating briefly
what he had already stated on YS 1.1.

That yoga, the control of the operations of the mind-field, is thus

twofold.

In samprajfiata the control is established over the vrttis of rajas
and tamas; viveka-khydati is the result. When sattva also is brought
under control and all gunas are dissolved into prakrti, the asam-
prajfidta samadhi ensues.

Summary of Discussion

Had this siitra said that yoga means control of ai// the operations
of the mind-field, only asamprajfidata samadhi would have consti-
tuted yoga, but since the word “all” was not used, samprajnata
samadhi 1s also included.

Because the mind is an evolute of matter (prakrti), the three
gunas of prakrti are clearly manifest in the mind, namely, sattva as
illumination of knowledge, rajas as activity and endeavour and
tamas as both stability and stagnation. That the mind exhibits
these three dispositions proves that it is material and partakes of
the three gunas.

When sattva predominates, supported by rajas and tamas, it
leads one to enjoyment of success, effective power and finer sen-
suous pleasures. When tamas predominates, one is drawn to un-
righteousness and ignorance, 1s averse to the neutrality of dispassion
(vairagya) and 1s unsuccessful or ineffective in the world.

When sattva is purified of tamas, it sees its way clear in all areas
and in all directions. In this state a slight touch of rajas gives it the
initiative towards knowledge, dispassion and sovereignty.

When the last vestiges of rajas have been eliminated, the mind-
field’s most sattvic, purest aspect, buddhi, becomes the instrument
of that discernment, which distinguishes the material personality
from the consciousness principle. This is the samadhi of wisdom
SOTRAI2 113
(samprajfiata), the final state of which is dharma-megha samadhi,
the raincloud of virtue and of the knowledge of the nature of all
things. This samadhi is defined in YS IV.29.

The conscious principle is called chiti-shakti, the potentia of
consciousness. Because of its ray, the faculty of discrimination
(buddhi) becomes operative. This Shakti is immutable; it undergoes
no change; unlike the evolutes of matter, it does not undergo
transference from one form or state to another. It does not move
from one locus to another and therefore does not reach out to
objects. The objects are presented to her view by buddhi, which
gathers the impressions through the mind and senses.

The process of nirodha is that of dissolving the guna evolutes
into their origins until the mind reaches a state of equilibrium. In
samprajfidta samadhi only rajas and tamas are brought under con-
trol; but before reaching asamprajfidta, all three gunas are dis-
solved; the vrttis then rest in their origin in the mind-field, from
which they can arise only at the command of purusha, the spiritual
self, who is now in isolation, free.

At the climax of the samprajfdta samadhi occurs the discern-
ment of the distinction between the mental personality and con-
sciousness; however, this is yet an experience within buddhi. Beyond
this it is controlled by the conscious will to appear or disappear,
but the attachment to it ceases. In asamprajfiata there is no concern
for the “other,” for the knowledge of separation, but only for what
will be described in the next siitra as the self residing in the self.
114. SOTRA 1.3 A
1
Siitra 1.3 WaT TE: TTSYSACM AT!
tada drashtuh sva-riipe’vasthinam
tada: then
drashtuh: seer’s
Sva-ripe: in own nature
ava-sthanam: stability, settling, remaining, being in a state
Then (upon the dissolution of vrttis) the seer rests in his own
true nature.
Even though the word drashtr ‘seer’ is in the masculine gender,
Vyasa explains this word to mean chiti-Shakti, the consciousness-
potentia. The seer, the spiritual self, is the same as the Shakti called
consciousness. The words chiti and Shakti are both feminine; hence
one could also translate the siitra to read:
Then the seer rests in her own true nature.
Vyasa’s Commentary
When the mind-field is in that state, there being no objects,
what is the nature of the spiritual self who is ordinarily identified
with the apprehensions of buddhi?
[Siitra‘] Then the seer rests in his own true nature
Then the consciousness-potentia is established in her own nature,
as (it 1s described to be) in isolation (kaivalya). When the mind-
field 1s involved with the external world (vyutthdna-chitta),* then
she does not appear to be so, even though she 1s so.
& When the mind-tield ts involved in the ordinary world, or in the thoughts thereof, it 1s
called viurthdna-chitta The word vyutthana means “to get up (that 1s, from meditation)
and to be wandering about ”
fhe mind-tield in the state of samadhi is called mrodha-chitta or samadhi-chitta. Com-
pared to asamprajfdta, the mind-field in samprajfdta also 1s considered vyurthdna-chitta,
whereas compared to the relatively lower grounds, it is regarded as nirodha-chitta or
vamadhe-chitta In asamprayjfidta, the mind-field 1s completely mirodha-chitta or samadhi-
chitta
SOTRAI3 115
Paraphrase of Vyasa’s Commentary

In the ordinary life, the spiritual self is identified with the cogni-
tions, apprehensions, awarenesses, of the buddhi into whom his
light reflects. When the mind-field has reached the state of nirodha,
control through the dissolution of the gunas, the mind-field has no
objects. What is then the nature of the spiritual self? The sitra
answers the question: Then the seer, the spiritual self, rests in his
own true nature. This spiritual self, which is the same as chiti-
Shakti (feminine), consciousness-potentia, then dwells in her own
nature.

When the mind of an accomplished yogi is interacting with the
ordinary world, the chiti-shakti still remains established in her own
nature, although outwardly she does not appear to be so.

Discussion

This siitra has several aims (a€kankshas) (VB). The first one is to
complete the definition of yoga as started in the previous sttra. In
the previous siitra, only the state of the mind-field and its vrttis
was explained, but nothing was said about the state or condition
of the spiritual self, which is the main concern of the Yoga-sitras.
That is accomplished in this siitra by way of fulfilling the second
aim, which is to explain what is the purpose of the spiritual self
that is being served through nirodha. This second purpose is served
by fulfilling the third aim, which is to draw attention to the absolute
nature of the spiritual self, here, immediately after the definition
siitra, so that in the student’s mind it may become connected to the
Phala-sitra (YS 1V.34), which states the ultimate goal of yoga,
asserting the true nature of the spiritual self. The present siitra,
then, establishes direct connection with the final sitra of the text;
and its enunciation here points to the fact that, linking all the
various subject matters discussed in the text, there runs a unifying
thread (siitra) from here to the end of Chapter 4.

We begin with the discussion of Vyasa’s clause qualifying the
spiritual self (purusha),

who 1s ordinarily identified with the apprehensions of buddh.
116 SOTRA 1.3

This clause is the translation of a single compound word, buddhi-
bodha-atm4, and needs to be understood in some detail (VM and
VB).

The living entities normally bound to the identity of the physical
body and the mental states do not experience the pure spiritual
self. Nor do others observing a living entity see such a purusha.
Our total apprehension of a conscious self is only by way of observ-
ing and recognizing the vrttis that arise in the mind. In other
words, the existence of consciousness without an object in the
mind is not suspected. However, according to the Sankhya-yoga
system, the buddhi, which is an evolute of matter, is not capable of
functioning by itself; it derives its semblance of awareness only
through the proximity of purusha, from whom it receives its light,
in a manner similar to that in which objects are illuminated by the
light of the sun. Even the analogy of the sun is imperfect (RS)
because the sun 1s perishable, whereas the self is eternal; yet the
analogy suffices for our limited purpose here.

As the sun shines on objects, so the purusha shines its ray upon
the buddhi and thereby knows all that passes in the buddhi, and
observes everything as a witness. But this is not known to the
living entities bound to the identity of body, mind-field, buddhi
and its vrttis. Therefore, it is easy for one to assume that there is
no other self besides the apprehension of vrttis in the buddhi. Fire
ceases to burn when the fuel is all consumed (NB and BG). The
question, therefore, arises as to the condition of the spiritual self
when the vrttis have been dissolved. Would not the purusha, whom
we ordinarily experience only as identified with the operations of
buddhi, simply cease (BG)?

The question continues (VM, AD). In asamprajfata, all that
remains in buddhi are the past samskdras, which are no longer
active, and even those may be burnt out. Then of what can the
spiritual self be conscious? If it were suggested that purusha would
still be conscious of the buddhi itself, in which there are no more
vrttis and only samsk4ras remain, this suggestion would go against
the entire foundation of the Sankhya-yoga philosophy, which be-
lieves that all material entities from the five gross elements to
SOTRA 13 117
buddhi, the subtlest, exist only to serve the purusha. The service
that buddhi performs for purusha is to present to him (her?) the
view of all the experiences, of which he, purusha, remains an un-
participating and neutral witness. Besides performing such a service,
the buddhi has no other purpose. When there are no vrttis, no
view is being presented to purusha; purusha has no interest in
buddhi for its own sake. Then what purpose do nirodha and the
mind-field, and buddhi in the nirodha state, serve in regard to
purusha? As explained in the discussion of the two previous sitras,
the twofold purpose of buddhi—the experience of external objects,
and the discernment of the separation between buddhi and the
self—have both ended with asamprajfiata samadhi. Vy4sa’s question
follows:

When the mind-field is in that state, there being no objects, what

is the nature of the spiritual self who is ordinarily identified with

the apprehensions of buddhi?
VM asks: Does purusha continue to illuminate the buddhi and the
external objects much as was happening in the vyutthdna situation,
except that, because there are no vrttis, he no longer sees the
objects? Or is it as the Nyaya philosophers have hypothesized, that
he becomes inactive, unconscious, like a piece of wood, only to go
through the necessary transmutations to become object-conscious
because of certain conditions present in vyutthdna? Or is it, as the
Buddhist philosophers believe, that he vanishes like a flame when
the conditions for the continuity of the flame have ceased? These
are the questions answered by the sitra:

Then the seer rests in his own true nature.

Insofar as the actual experience of samadhi is concerned, NTC
states that the seer, which had become delimited by ahamkara and
who is the meaning of the word /, dwells in the self which is
exclusive (kevala) consciousness. When the yogi comes into ordi-
nary life (vrurthdna) and sees the time that has elapsed (compare
with Siitra 1.51), he infers that he was in the state of samadhi.
118 SOTRA 13

It is explained throughout the Sankhya-yoga literature that the
self is ever-pure, ever-wise, ever-free, completely unblemished, un-
touched, unaltered, without regard to time, space, condition or
association with matter. It is buddhi alone that undergoes transfor-
mations in association with gunas (VM).

«In association with sattva it takes on the Shanta, pacific, attribute

«In association with rajas it takes on the ghora, fierce, attribute

eIn association with tamas it takes on the miudha, stupefied or

somnolent, attribute

These three—shdanta, ghora, and miidha—are the major personality
dispositions, depending on the inclinations, thoughts, words and
acts of each. It is not purusha, the spiritual self, who becomes
pacific, fierce or stupefied. Any appearance of sh@nta, ghora or
miudha attributes in purusha is a temporary condition of appear-
ance (aupdadhika) arising from a superimposed condition (upddhi).
It is interesting to note that the terms up@dhi and aupadhika are
not strictly from the early Sankhya-yoga philosophical system. They
have been borrowed by the commentators without reserve from
the Vedanta doctrinal system, thus creating a syncretic terminology.
This by no means changes the Sankhya doctrine itself, but only
emphasizes grounds that are shared by both Vedanta and Sankhya,
leaving the other areas open to discussion.

In both Sankhya and Vedanta, the analogy of the clear crystal is
used freely (VB, VM, NB, BG, RY). A red flower placed near a
clear crystal reflects in the crystal, giving it a reddish hue, which
vanishes immediately when the flower is removed. The apparent
reddishness in the crystal 1s not innate or real. It is from the
up@dhi, the temporary condition simply attributed to it; it 1s aupa-
dhika. Similarly any appearance of Shanta, ghora or midha per-
sonality characteristics do not belong to the soul, the spiritual self,
Just as nothing really happens to the crystal in the presence of the
red flower. The contro] of vrttis through the dissolution of the
gunas is analogous to the removal of the red flower from the
vicinity of the crystal. The crystal then remains in its own nature;
the spiritual self then remains in his own nature. When a condition
SOTRAI3 119
is removed, the object that was conditioned thereby does not vanish
(VM) but reverts to its own nature. So, in the light analogy, the
argument about purusha vanishing when no vrttis are being pre-
sented to it by buddhi is untenable.

All analogies are imperfect. The analogy of the crystal and the
red flower still suggests some kind of a change taking place in the
supposedly unalterable purusha. The commentator VM therefore
tries to improve on this analogy by borrowing another analogy
from Vedanta. As one walks on the beach, he sees a silver-like
glint and thinks he has found a silver object. As he approaches
closer, the object turns out to be a mother-of-pearl! seashell. But
when the observer thought he saw silver, the mother-of-pearl did
not actually turn into silver. Similarly, all the appearances of Shanta,
ghora, and midha attributed to purusha cannot cause or imply
any internal change in him.

Prior to asamprajfiata, purusha’s self-luminosity illuminated the
buddhi; now when the “other” object thus illuminated has fulfilled
its purposes and its service is no longer needed, its master continues
to be self-luminous. The assumption that he had been an agent of
actions (cf. Bhagavad-gita 111.27) is eradicated (BR). This completes
the definition of yoga (NB): nirodha that leads to the seer’s remain-
ing in his own nature totally and permanently (atyantika) (cf. Sankhya-
karika 1.1 and Sankhya-pravachana-sitra 1.2) is the definition of
yoga. The word @tyantika ‘total and permanent’ implies that (a)
momentary experiences of stillness are not to be included; (5)
samprajfata samadhi is not included except as a step and a means
to the asamprajriata; (c) sleep is not included; and (d) the dissolu-
tion of individual minds that is incidental to the cosmic dissolutions
is not included. So, we may conclude in Vyasa’s words:

Then the consciousness-potentia 1s established in her own nature,

as (it 1s described to be) in isolation (Xaivalya).

The Yoga-sitras consider the gender of “purusha” merely a lin-
guistic or grammatical convenience. This masculine word, equated
with spiritual self, soul, and so forth, is used interchangeably with
the feminine words
120 SUTRA 13

Shakti: energy, force, power

chiti: consciousness

chiti-Shakti: consciousness-potentia, consciousness power,

consciousness principle

drshi: sight, seeing

drshi-Shakti or drk-Shakti: seeing-potentia, seeing power
This approach is based on the ancient dictum that shakti-shakti-
mator abhedah, “there is no distinction between Shakti and the
possessor of Shakti; the power and the power-possessor are one.”
Hence purusha and his power are one and the same. The feminine
words are used in YS II.16,20,25; IV.34. As we have stated, YS
IV.34 more or less reiterates the purpose of this Siitra 1.3. Vyasa
quotes a part of YS 1V.34—sva-riipa-pratishtha-chiti-shaktih—as a
commentary on I.3. The last sentence of Vyasa’s commentary is:

When the mind-field is involved with the external world (vyut-

thana-chitta), then she (chiti-Shakti) does not appear to be so,

even though she is so.
(The compound word vyutthdna-chitta has been explained in the
footnote on p. 114.) Even though in outward appearances the
consciousness-potentia, the spiritual self, seems corruptible, it is
not so. “Even though she is so” (that is, pure and self-luminous,
dwelling in her own nature), the appearances of corruptibility are
muisleading—much like the appearance of silver in a seashell.

“It is by the elimination (mrodha) of all other vrttis that one
gains the yoga of one-mindedness with Me,” says the Lord (Shiva)
in the Kiirma-purdna and similar texts. By quoting this, NTC
implies that the meaning of yoga is the union with Deity. It also
means, as the Bhagavad-gita states, that in this state “the self,
seeing the self, is contented with the self” (V1.20).

NTC goes on to say that the great yoga (mahd-yoga) is that in
which there are no objects of concentration as supports (@lambana)
and there remains only the manifestation (abhi-vyakti) of one’s
own nature. He means that maha-yoga 1s the yoga of absence or
negation of all transient feelings and states (abhadva-yoga). This
SOTRA 13 12!
abhava-yoga is yoga in which all is contemplated as Void or Empty
(Shiinya), whereby one then begins to see the self. In mahd-yoga
one sees the ever-blissful (nitya-ananda), unanointed (nir-afijana)
self (atman).
122. SOTRA 14
Siitra 1.4 atearecatraca
vrtti-siripyam itaratra
vrtti: (with) operations, activities, fluctuations, modifications
sGripyam: similarity, assimilation, appearance of, identification
of form or nature
itaratra: elsewhere

Elsewhere, identification with the form and nature of yrttis.

In states other than asamprajfiata samadhi, the spiritual seif

appears identified with the vrttis.

Vyasa’s Commentary

How then? Because then the objects are being presented to (pu-
rusha’s) view,

[Satra:] Elsewhere, identification with the form and nature of
vrttis.

Purusha appears as having no mode (vrtti) as distinguished from
that of the vrttis of the mind-field which (arise) in the vyutthana
situation. The mind-field is like a magnet. It renders benefits and
service by its mere presence in the proximity. Being an object of
(purusha’s) view, it becomes the property and possession (svam) of
purusha, who 1s its master and proprietor (sva@min). Therefore, the
cause of purusha’s cognition of the vrttis of the mind-field is his
beginningless connection (therewith). As the siitra (of Pafichaghikha)
says:

There 1s only one perception; reflective cognition (khyGti) alone
1s the perception
Paraphrase of Vyadsa’s Commentary

Vyasa continues from the last sentence of the commentary on

YS 1.3, which was:
SUTRA 14 123

When the mind-field is involved with the external world (vyut-

thana-chitta), then she [the consciousness-potentia, dwelling in

her own nature] does not appear to be so, even though she is so.
Then how does she appear to be? When buddhi is presenting objects
in the form of vrttis to her view, it appears as though chiti-Shakti’s
(purusha’s) existence or mode of being in the vywtthdna situation is
no other than that of the vrttis, being completely undistinguished
from them. As Pajichashikha, one of the ancient founders of San-
khya, said:

°

Both the buddhi and purusha then appear to have only one

perception, which 1s their single reflective cognition, as though

both were one.
The mind-field is like a magnet. It does not need to make an effort.
Like a magnet, simply by its presence it serves the purpose of
purusha, presenting to his view whatever vrttis arise from its ex-
perience of external objects. It is the property of the master, who is
purusha himself. Purusha has always been its master and it has
always been his possession. This relationship of theirs is beginning-
less and natural. No other relationship between them is possible
because of their respective natures.

Discussion

A number of controversial points need clarification in order to
fully understand this sitra. The most important of these is the
question as to what constitutes the actual personality. Even though
this discussion 1s most relevant to YS 11.6, where asmutd is dealt
with, one could not follow the argument on the current sitra and
other subsequent siitras without some introduction here.

The commentators, great @charyas of the past, all agree that the
spiritual self 1s incorruptible and immutable. But if this 1s so, why
does it appear to be corruptible, mutable, impure, ignorant and
consequently bound” Here the achdaryas present two hypotheses to
try to explain this. The first of these can be summarized as follows:
124 SOTRA 14

The composite mental personality is created by purusha’s illumi-
nation reflecting in the buddhi, and the vrttis arising in the buddhi
and mind that are thus illuminated.

+The subjective, composite personality experiences objects being
presented to the senses, and sensations being conveyed to the
mind-field.

«The current experiences as well as the impressions (sarnskaras)
produce vrttis in the mind-field, especially in the buddhi.

«The innermost aspect of the mind-field is buddhi, which is
illuminated by the rays of purusha reflecting in it, like the sun’s
rays in a mirror.

- Whatever processions of vrttis occur in the mirror of buddhi,
purusha remains untouched by them, a neutral witness.

To summarize the argument, the body serves as the vessel to
contain this composite mental personality, and this entire complex
is thus ruled by the presence, proximity, of the neutral, conscious
spiritual self. In this scheme the predominantly sattvic composition
of the mirror of buddhi causes it to receive purusha’s illumination,
enabling it, in turn, to illuminate external objects, experience them
and create the wave-like vrttis within itself. Here purusha remains
completely untouched. The assumption of a personality is created
only in the buddhi and chitta, while purusha remains immutable
and ever-free. The analogy of a flower’s colours reflecting in the
clear crystal, then, is inappropriate with regard to purusha because
nothing is reflected therein. The buddhi illuminated by purusha is
alone responsible for all the fluctuations and modifications. The
analogy of the seashell appearing as glinting silver, however, is
more applicable. An observer sees the silver, but the seashell sui
ipse remains unchanged. It is buddhi that says, “I am happy, un-
happy,” etc., but purusha himself is a neutral witness.

The second hypothesis (especially VB, BG, NB) is the same as
the first except that the vrttis arising in the chitta-buddhi complex
are reflected back into purusha. In this hypothesis purusha mistakes
himself as thinking, “I am happy, unhappy,” etc., and it is here
SOTRA 14 125
that the analogy of the coloured flower reflecting in the crystal is
relevant. The imperfections of this analogy, however, are obvious.
How the sun-like purusha, the very source of the illumination
reflected in the sattvic buddhi, can then become a crystal, receiving
the reflection of buddhi’s vrttis into itself and actually falling into
the semblance of a bondage, is difficult to understand. This hypo-
thesis makes purusha changeable, mutable, subject to parinadma
(alteration) through the proximity or influence of a factor outside
himself, which goes against the central tenets of Sankhya-yoga
philosophy and destroys the very foundation of the doctrine of the
eternal purity of purusha. Possibly the dcharyas postulating this
hypothesis hoped to avert its adverse effects on the doctrine by
citing the analogy of the crystal and using phrases like “semblance
of mutability” and “as if purusha were undergoing a change, but in
reality remaining unchanged like the crystal.” In fact, however, the
reflection of a red japa flower in the crystal does imply a tempo-
rary change in the crystal. If the states of buddhi were to reflect in
purusha, one would have to admit purusha as being subject to
colouration (rdga).

Most commentators have not succeeded in resolving this dif-
ficulty. In fact, they cannot make up their minds as to which of
these two possibilities is upheld by Patafijali and Vyasa. Conse-
quently they have tied themselves into polemical knots of contra-
dictions. In one paragraph the purusha is immutable; in the next
the colours reflect in him; and in the third he thinks, “I am happy,
unhappy,” and so forth. Only BR and HA have held fast to the
first hypothesis, which follows the true tenet of Sankhya-yoga. The
other dcharyas, revered as they are, have erred, as we shall see
again further on.

Vyasa establishes the ever-pure nature of the spiritual self as
follows:

Because then the objects are being presented to (purusha’s) view.
[Sara ] Elsewhere, identification with the form and nature of
vrttis
126 SOTRA 14

“Elsewhere” means the state other than the asamprajfidta samadhi
referred to in the last sitra. The antonym of samadhi is vyutthana,
literally, “getting up, being away from (meditation).” Compared to
asamprajfidta, even samprajfiata is considered vyutthdna. “Getting
up” does not imply merely moving the body away from one’s
meditation seat, but rather implies the absence of stillness of the
mind in which the vrttis continue to arise.

In this vyutthdna state, incorporating everything lower than
asamprajriata, the vrttis are shown to the spiritual self. The question
naturally arises as to whether purusha’s state undergoes an alter-
ation, whether he is one thing in samadhi and something else in
vyutthana and therefore not immutable (a-parinamin). VM says
that in vyuwtthana the mind’s vrttis of Shanta (peace, calm), ghora
(ferocity) and midha (somnolence, stupefaction) may merely appear
to become the vrttis of purusha. VB insists, however, that in vyut-
thana there occurs saripya—identity or similarity of the form or
nature of the seer with that of the mind-field in the vrtti—and that
this similarity or identity consists of the reflection and counter-
reflection becoming one. VB’s idea is that purusha’s light illuminates
the buddhi and the vrttis of the buddhi reflect in purusha, becoming
the latter’s vrttis; these vrttis reflecting back into buddhi’s mirror
assume identity with the original vrttis.

The vrttis are said to be like a candle flame (VM, NB). A candle
flame exists for a moment only but appears continuous because as
soon as one set of particles is consumed, another set takes its
place. These are, thus, mutations of state and not merely of attri-
butes and distinguishing marks (YS I11.13). These vrttis are like
molten copper poured into a crucible taking the latter’s form. Be-
cause they are a product of the three gunas and, therefore, seats of

pleasure, pain and delusion, they become pacific (Shanta), ferocious
(ghora) or stupefied (miadha). The vrttis of purusha in this view
become inseparable from these because the objects in the form of
vrttis are presented, shown, to purusha, and reflected in him. The
“vrtti” is not a mere quality, as we read in the Sartkhya-pravachana-
sitra (V.107):
SUTRA 1.4 127
The vrtti is a principle different from a fragment or quality. It
serves the purpose of causing a connection and glides forth (among
objects, senses and the mind).
Unlike a spark of fire, the vrttis in this view are not a fragment of
objects, senses or the mind but a modification that simply glides
along, establishing connections.

VM says that any alteration occurs in the buddhi alone and that
vrttis can be attributed only to the reflection of purusha present to
the buddhi. As someone who seeing his clean face in an unclean
mirror might go away thinking his own face to be unclean, so
purusha’s uncleanness is a mere appearance. VB says that since the
reflections of the vrttis cast upon purusha are insubstantial (a-
vastu), not a real object, purusha’s immutability remains unham-
pered in spite of them, again, like that of a crystal in which a
colour is being reflected. As we read in the Sarikhya-pravachana-
sittra (V1.28):

As the yapa@ flower does not really cause a colouring of the crystal,

but merely an assumption
of identity, so it is in the case with the vrttis reflecting in purusha.
VM says: As though buddhi takes on the role of purusha, it appears
as if purusha has vrttis. But, these vrttis, having no substance like
that of objects, cannot really affect the purusha. All that happens
1s a false assumption (abhimana). A superimposition (samdropa)
occurs, which 1s an idea similar to Vedanta’s superimposition
(adhya@ropa) Because of this, purusha (a) who has no perversive
perception (vwiparyaya), may be considered as having perceived
falsely, (6) who has no cause to experience the truits of karma,
may be considered an experiencer: (c) who has no discernment
(viveka-khyati), may be attributed to possess the discernment of
the separation of self and prakrti. CAwi-Shakt: has no sutfering and
so forth so far as commentators such as VM are concerned How-
ever, in the view of VB, NB and BG, she considers herself in
vrutthana, as though in suffering and so forth, but these false
assumptions are again insubstantial (a-vastu) One might well ask
128 SOTRAIL4

these commentators that if the evolutes of prakrti are all substan-
tial, how can the modifications in the mind-field, which is an evo-
lute, be insubstantial?

The analogy of the crystal used in this way is inapplicable also
because, we repeat, the appearance of a colour is indeed an altera-
tion. The fact is that absolutely nothing reflects on purusha. The
commentators have failed to grasp the actual locus of the appear-
ance of similarity and identity (saripya) of buddhi and purusha.
This saripya can be understood only as follows: It is not as though
purusha mimics the vrttis of the buddhi and cries out, “I am un-
clean!” Purusha’s luminosity remains constant and unaffected. It is
the buddhi, an unconscious evolute of matter having been touched
by the luminous presence of purusha, which masquerades as purusha,
saying, “I am a spirit. Though I am pure, I appear as impure.
Though not subject to suffering, | appear to suffer. It is all my
play.” In other words, the locus of s@riipya is buddhi, the innermost
aspect of the mind-field. Other observers see this person and think,
“He suffers” “Purusha within him must suffer.” The buddhi also
says, “I, purusha, suffer!” It is as though a slave at the palace gate
wearing velvet and gold given by the king were to declare, “I the
king am a king no more!"—yet the true king sits on his throne
resplendent in all his glory.

All the repetitions of the particle word iva (“as though,” “as if”)
and similar words and phrases employed by the commentators
simply do not apply to purusha. They apply to the false I-ness
(asmita), which 1s the true explanation of sd@ripya. It is in the sitra
defining asmua@ (YS 11 6) that Patafiyali uses the word rva: “as if.”
“as though” the power of the seer (spiritual self) and of the seen
(mind-field, an evolute of prakrti) had assumed an identity. Any
superimposition (samdropa) goes only this tar and does not extend
to purusha. Any assumption of false identity (abhimdna) 1s an act
of the ego (ahamkd@ra), and to attribute it to purusha is totally
contrary to Sankhya philosophy.

However, to support his view that the vrttis reflect into purusha,
VB quotes Vishnu-purana 1.14.35:
SOTRA 14 129
Homage to Him, the universal self, Who has assumed the form
of the inner instrument and Who presents to atman, the self, the
experiences grasped with the senses.
This may be a view presented in the Vishnu-purana, but it is
definitely not the tenet held by Patajijali and Vyasa.

On the other hand, VB is more coherent when he challenges the
views of others who hold that “I am happy, unhappy,” etc. are
innate attributes of atman, the self. He argues that if pleasure,
pain, etc. were mutative modes (parindmas) of the self, then there
would be no possibility of averting the vrttis without cutting the
atman piece by piece! There would simply be no sense in pursuing
liberation. If one were to propose that the innate pleasure and pain
and so forth of the self were brought into activity through the
union of the mind with the self, then why not suppose that mind
alone ts sufficient to produce the effects such as pleasure and pain.
Mind is efficacious enough. To assume the mind, self and their
union, all three, to be the cause where one would suffice is logic-
ally cumbersome (gauravam).

A possible assumption that buddhi alone, without purusha, might
be the experiencer of its own being as the self, is contradicted
throughout the Sankhya-yoga philosophy and will be discussed
under Sitra 1V.19ff.

The viewpoint of Patafijali and Vyasa 1s upheld in texts like the
Bhagavad-gitd (X111.29).

Who sees the acts as being performed through prakrti alone, he
thereby sees 4tman as not acting at all

It is well here to mention Pafichashikha, who, after Kapila and
Asuri, was third in line among the founders of Sankhya. His vast
work, Shashti-tantra, was lost in antiquity, and from it only a
handful of quotations have filtered down to the present. We read
Vyasa’s quotation from him:

There is only one perception, reflective cognition (Ahidam) alone
1s the perception
130 SOTRA 14

Khyati here is not to be confused with discernment of the sep-
arateness of buddhi and purusha (viveka-khyati), which occurs in
the final stages of samprajfidta samadhi and leads to asamprajfiata.
The khydti here is the opposite of this discernment; it is rather an
appearance of the identity of buddhi and purusha, whose reflective
cognition in the vyutthdna situation appears single.

The term khyati then technically combines within its meaning
the entire process described on p. 124, and the reader is advised to
study that description again. The locus of this perception is asmita,
which occurs in buddhi. Here the light of self mingles with the
sattva-luminosity of matter (prakrti). This perception (darshana) is
defined by VM to include only externalized perception, the mech-
anical process leading to the arousal of vrttis in the mind. It is not
to be confused with consciousness (chaitanya), which is an attri-
bute of the spiritual self alone. It is the worldly perception that
waxes and wanes, while consciousness of the self remains constant.
Also what other observers perceive as a composite personality (see
p. 124) is a process that occurs at this level.

We have translated khydti as “reflective cognition.” Even though
the term kAyati occurs in other Sanskrit philosophical systems in a
different sense (that of cognition in logic), here it has a narrowed
meaning limited to the definitions within our system. We have
translated the word as “reflective cognition” to include three levels
of the process of khyatt:

1 The hght of self reflecting in buddhi, thereby enabling the latter

to cognize objects and to experience sensations;

2. the buddhi thereby cognizing these objects as they also reflect

into the buddhi; and

3 the reflection of the self and that of the objects mingling in

buddhi, producing vrttis, and buddhi again reflecting upon
them, contemplating them.
Our process of perception consists solely of this. As PafichaShikha
has stated, there is no other perception but this process.

Because of this reflective process (HA) purusha and buddhi ap-

pear as if unified. They appear one (RY), like water and milk
SUTRA 14 131
mixed, even though they are two entirely separate entities; one is
not converted into the other, but their closeness causes them to
seem as one. Again it must be remembered that this commingling
occurs not in purusha but in the buddhi alone. Consciousness
(VM) is the nature of purusha and not of the khyati process.

How is it possible then that the formless purusha reflects in the
buddhi, which, though material, is so subtle as to appear formless?
The answer is that (VB) the analogy of reflection needs to be
analysed. It does not mean an actual reflection like that of the sun
into a jar or pool of water. The “reflection” is twofold:

1. Through the proximity of purusha (VB) some natural alteration

occurs in the buddhi enabling it to cognize.

2. A certain other alteration (parindma) occurs (VB, NB) in the
buddhi upon the proximity of an object, whereby the buddhi
subtly takes on the very form of the object thus perceived. That
alteration is called the vrtti.

But what exactly is the relationship between the mind-field and the
self, and what causes their union? Vyasa says:

The mind-field is like a magnet. It renders benefits and service by

its mere presence in the proximity [of the spiritual self].

It 1s not possible, however, (VM) for something material to
benefit the pure spiritual self. If the mind, a material evolute, were
to affect the self in any way, that would subject the self to a certain
corruptibility. The word upa-kdra in its conventional signification
(rudhi) means “benefit,” but here it can only signify “service,” with
a derivative meaning (vaugika): upa ‘near’, kara ‘to do’—“to simply
act in a certain way by mere presence.” The buddhi (HA) serves as
the self’s instrument for yoga and liberation by its mere proximity,
without ever touching the latter,-as a magnet (VB, NB) pulls out a
pin stuck in the body without an active effort of its own. The
mind-field (VM) is not in any way joined to purusha.

The service that buddhi performs for purusha is to be its “per-
ceptible” (drShya), that is, its object of perception, so that khyari
132, SOTRAI4

may occur and consequently purusha’s capacity to be the master
over matter may be made manifest. To serve as a drShya means
(VM) to be the self’s object of experience when the mind-field is
converted into the forms of the objects it experiences from the
external world. For example, a sight or sound presented to the
mind-field is refined into the mind’s vrtti. In the khydrti process
such a vrtti commingles with the light of self and serves the latter
by its proximity without ever touching or affecting it.

The term “proximity” (sdnnidhya) needs to be understood. It
does not mean (VM, HA) proximity in space and time because
according to Sankhya philosophy the spiritual self is beyond space
and time altogether, and matter, too, is beyond space and time in
its unmanifest prakrti (pradhdna) state. The proximity consists of
compatibility (yogyarta) of qualities inherent in the two. That is,
purusha has the power to make matter its servant, and matter has
the capacity to serve. The locus of this proximity, the merger of
the compatibilities, is in the “singularity of a cognition” (pratyaya),
which is explained by Vyasa as:

Being an object of (purusha’s) view, it [matter as its evolute the

mind-field or buddhi] becomes the property and possession (svar)

of purusha, who is its master and proprietor (svamin). Therefore,

the cause of purusha’s cognition of the vrttis of the mind-field 1s

his beginningless connection (therewith).
This “beginningless connection” needs to be understood. The San-
skrit word used 1s not samyoga ‘union’. A union is normally defined
as “a coming together of those that were separate.” This definition
cannot apply to the union of eternal factors such as the spiritual
self and unmanifest matter. Hence Vyasa uses the word samban-
dha ‘relationship or connection (rather than union with)’. The self
has known eternally that matter 1s his domain, his possession and
property. In that context he knows, “Buddhi is mine.” The fact
(HA) that the self is the seer, and the matter 1s seen, 1s eternal, it 1s
the innate nature of the relationship. The eternal entities have
eternal natures and the connections between such are, therefore,
eternal. This answers (VM) the question: If the bondage is caused
SOTRA 14 133
by ignorance (which is defined in YS II.3,5), what causes the be-
ginning of such ignorance? That ignorance is merely the relationship
between the seer and the seen, beginningless, known to purusha,
and eternal; it has no other extrinsic cause.

Another question is: If the relationship is eternal, what happens
during the dissolution of the universe (pralaya), the alternate of
creation in the endless cycles of creation and dissolution? VB
answers: When a person sleeps, he still remains the proprietor of
his treasure. Furthermore, when a relationship is not any factor or
process apart from the inherent attributes of the relata or the
correlates, such problems do not arise. The relationship between
self and matter is not a process that begins or occurs under certain
conditions, such as creation, and ceases under certain other con-
ditions, such as dissolution. The inherent quality remains as a seed.
The recurrence of khy@ti is not caused by any external factor but is
retained as a seed, a potential, as part of the inherence of the
attributes of each entity. The effectiveness of such inherence con-
tinues only through the impressions (sarhskaras) in the buddhi, the
inclinations that their strength produces, becoming propensities
(vasanas) and leading to the pacific, fierce or stupefied vrttis.
Sank hya-pravachana-sitra 1.104 and V1.55 say (VB) that such effec-
tiveness of the inherent attribute ceases at the pure consciousness
when isolation (kKaivalya) occurs and khyati ceases.

But, asks an objector, how is it possible (VB) that an eternal or
beginningless relationship can exist as inherent in something (i.e.,
mahat or buddhi) which 1s a non-eternal evolute of matter? The
problem is solved by reminding ourselves of the Sankhya tenet of
sat-karya-vdda, that an effect always exists within its cause, and
the cause does not cease simply because the cause has been trans-
muted into an effect. Consequently mahat or buddhi never cease to
partake of an inherent relationship which is an eternal attribute of
their cause, prakrti.

As stated in YS 1.22 and confirmed elsewhere (VB), the rela-
tionship discussed above exists only between the individual purusha
and his personal mind-field and not between the said individual
and all mind-fields, nor between the universal purusha and a specific
134. SOTRA 14
mind-field. Vrttis and the spiritual self’s awareness of them (YS
IV.18) are two separate factors, like a candle illuminating the interior
of a jar into which it has been placed, but from which it maintains
a separate identity. At no stage do they become one, like a jewel
and its light. In this context the reader should deeply contemplate
the two analogies of a candle in a jar and of a jewel and its
luminosity. Vy4sa’s quotation from Pafichashikha,

There is only one perception; reflective cogmition (khyari) alone

is the perception,
was explained and discussed on pp. 129-31 and need not be re-
peated here. To conclude, then:

As the moon does not break up even though its reflection in

turbulent water appears fragmented,
so purusha (BR) remains unaltered in the khydti process of
buddhi.?

9 For a summary of the discussion on this stra please read the paraphrase of Vy&sa’s
commentary and the first hypothesis regarding subjective composite personality defined on
p 124, The rereading of this material will establish that purusha always remains a neutral
witness It 1s thus always in samadhi (refer to p 108 and subsequent discussion) In vyut-
thana, purusha appears to be involved in vrttis but 1s not really so because the process of
khy Gti occurs in the buddhi and not in the spiritual self Any statements or arguments
Proposing that vyttis reflect into, or that AAydr occurs in, purusha are experientally falla-
cious as well as untenable in the light of the basic Sankhya-yoga tenet that purusha Is
incorruptible BG, NB, NBB reflect VB’s opinions on these matters for the most part and
are therefore not quoted extensively
SOTRAIS 135
Siitra 1.5 aaa: waa: Prevearhrerear: |
vrttayah pafichatayyah klishtaklishtah
vrttayah: the vrttis (are)
pafichatayyah: fivefold (and of two kinds)
klishta-: afflicted, painful and impure, imbued with kleshas, and
a-klishtah: not afflicted, not painful, pure, not imbued with kleshas

The vyttis are fivefold (and of two kinds): afflicted, painful and

impure, imbued with kleShas (klishta); and not afflicted, not

painful, pure, not imbued with kleshas (a-klishta).
Vyasa’s Commentary

Now, those (vrttis) must be controlled. Though many, the mind-

field’s
[Sdazra:] vyttis are fivefold (and of two kinds): afflicted . . . and
not afflicted.

The afflicted, painful and impure vrttis are caused by the kleshas
and are causes of the kleshas. These become the field for the
abundant growth of the domain of karmas (karma@shaya).

The unafflicted vrttis are those whose subject is discernment
(viveka-khya@ti), and which impede the power of gunas. These re-
main unafflicted even when fallen in the currents of the afflicted
ones They remain unafflicted also in the intervals of the afflicted
ones.

The afflicted vrttis also (appear) in the intervals of the unafflicted
ones

The vrttis produce their own kind of sarnskaras, and in turn, the
samskaras produce identical vrttis. Thus the wheel of vrttis and
samsk4ras revolves incessantly.

When the mind-field becomes such that it has completed the
work within its authority, 1t stands on its own.

Or it even goes into dissolution
136 SOTRA ILS
Paraphrase of Vyasa’s Commentary

The vrttis with which purusha appears to be assimilated ( YS 1.4)
need to be brought under control according to the definition of
yoga (YS 1.2). The vrttis are innumerable but can be classified into
a fivefold division of categories (YS 1.6). Furthermore, all these
five categories of vrttis are of two types: (a) afflicted, painful,
impure (klishfa), and (b) unafflicted, not painful, pure (a-klishta).
The afflicted vrttis are caused by kleshas and produce further
kleshas (YS 11.3) and cause the growth of the domain of karma
(karmaShaya), which leads to continued bondage (YS I1.12).

The unafflicted, sattvic, vrttis are those that lead to discernment
(viveka-khyati) by impeding the power of the gunas. Even when
the unafflicted vrttis are experienced within the streams of the
afflicted ones, they yet remain unafflicted. Also, when they appear
in the intervals between the periods of afflicted ones, they remain
unaffected by the latter.

Similarly, the afflicted vrttis make their appearance in the inter-
vals between the periods of unafflicted ones.

The vrttis produce on the mind-field their own kinds of impres-
sions (sarnskaras), which in turn create similar vrttis, and the vi-
cious circle continues without ceasing.

The mind, however, is purified through the practice of yoga.
Furthermore, the sattvic vrttis are encouraged so that the mind
progresses towards samprajfiata samadhi, which leads to viveka-
khyati, the discrimination, discernment, of the separateness of the
composite personality and the spiritual self.

At this point the mind has served its purpose; it has completed
the work that is within its authority. Now the vrttis are of no
further service. Mind alone remains, entirely on its own, without
reference to external objects.

The relationship between the spiritual self and all the material
evolutes, including the mind-field, 1s now severed and all the evolutes
dissolve into the equilibrium of prakrti. Purusha’s isolation, kai-
valya, 1s now complete.
SOTRA ILS 137
Discussion
We begin with Vydsa’s sentences:
Now, those (vrttis) must be controlled. Though many, the mind-
field’s
[Sdarra-] vrttis are fivefold (and of two kinds): afflicted . . .
and unafflicted
The Yoga-siitras instruct one to control the vrttis of the mind-field.
Now, one can be taught only what is possible (VM), and the
control of vrttis is not possible without first knowing them. But
they are too numerous to be counted even in a thousand lifetimes.
They are innumerable not only within a single person’s mind-field
but all together in the mind-fields of many persons (VM, VB, SS,
RY, NB). How then can these innumerable vrttis be known in
order to be controlled (VM,VB)? This siitra solves the problem by
classifying the innumerable vrttis into five categories (VM, VB).
All the other vrttis are products of these five (VB). Through con-
trol of the five, all their derivatives, the totality of innumerable
vrttis, are controlled. Vrttis such as rdga (attraction) and dvesha
(aversion) are automatically prevented from arising (BG) when
their causes, the five major vrttis, are brought under control.

The list of five is not exhaustive (VM and RY on YS 1.6). No
statement is made to exclude such vrttis as, for example, the loss
of a sense of direction, or the false impression of a single line ora
circle of fire that is induced when a torch is moved rapidly (a/dta-
chakra). Even though it may be difficult to place such mental
activity within any of the five categories of vrttis, any exclusion is
of a paryuddsa type (negation by omission) rather than prasayjya-
pratishedha (negation by direct statement) against a possibility. A
paryudasa negation 1s not very strong and implies that an entity
omitted may be included to fulfil the original intent (@ka@nksha).
The @kankshda here is to include rather than exclude, as indicated
by the fact that the words used are pafichatayyah ‘fivefold’ and
pafichadhda (see Vyasa on YS 1.6) ‘divided in five ways’, and not
simply paficha ‘five’.
138 SOTRAILS

The siitra makes these five vrttis known. “Vrttis of the mind-
field” refers to the genus mind-field, so that all the specific mind-
fields are included. The vrtti is a single entity, a whole, with five
parts (VM, RY), namely, pramana, etc. enumerated in the next
stitra. Hence the term “fivefold” (pafichatayi).

At this point VB gives a new twist to the word vrtti. The original
meaning of this word is as we have translated it, but its secondary
meaning is “means of livelihood.” Vrttis are the mind-field’s means
of livelihood (vrttis); it is by these that the mind continues to
survive. Without them it has no existence.

To provide practical application (VM) to the theory and to
ascertain which of the vrttis are desirable and which are to be
avoided (RY), the five are further subdivided into two: klishta and
a-klishta. The mind functions (HA) both as

pra-vartaka: involver, engager, initiator, promoter, inducer, pro-

ducer, instigator, urging and prompting one towards X, and
ni-vartaka: disinvolver, terminator, inhibitor, abstainer, abolisher,
urging and prompting one away from X.
Thus the fivefold vrttis are positivistic or negativistic, leading to
bondage or to liberation. For example, a proof (pramdna) leading
the mind (HA) to favour, to an attraction or any klesSha is con-
sidered klishta. A proof leading one to rise beyond attraction or
aversion is a-klishja.

One may argue that a proof is neutral and the conclusions imper-
sonal, but yoga psychology would reply that this is not the case.
Because of the force of unconsciously stored past impressions (sarh-
skdras), and because of the resultant personal propensities (vdsands),
the mind 1s inclined towards a certain use of the proof, and draws
its own favoured conclusions. For example: (a) a wolf’s mind re-
ceives proof, through its eye, that a woman 1s present in the forest.
It concludes. “Flesh to eat”; (6) a passionate youth’s mind receives
proof, through his eye, that a woman is present. He concludes: “A
beauty to ravish”; (c) a yogi’s mind receives proof, through his eye,
that a woman ts present He concludes: “What otherwise would
have been a corpse is here imbued with the luminosity and the
SOTRALS 139
consequent beauty of the spiritual self. The spiritual self is to be
realized.” The first two examples are pramdna processes in the
afflicted and impure category, klishta. The last example is in the
unafflicted category, a-klishja.

Whether klishta or a-klishta, the vrttis of both kinds (VB, BG)
have to be brought under control. By fostering the a-klishtas, one
controls the klishtas (VM,VB), and then one vanquishes the a-
klishta vyttis in turn through transcendental dispassion (para-
vairdgya) (YS 1.16). As we read elsewhere,

Vanquish the others by sattva, then that sattva by (higher) sattva.
Bhagavata-purdna X1.13.1.

Since all vrttis consist of the three gunas and are therefore klishja
(VB), it might seem inappropriate to divide them into klishta and
a-klishta. The subclassification, though, indicates only the partic-
ular degree of the relationship between the vrttis and the k/eshas.
Vyasa explains this relationship:

The afflicted, painful and impure vrttis are caused by the k/leshas

and are causes of the kleshas.

The single, compound word klesha-hetukah may be translated as
“caused by the kleshas” and “causes of the kleshas.” Some com-
mentators have stood by the first reading, and others have accepted
the second. It is probably more correct, however, to side with
those who have tried to include and reconcile both. The k/eshas,
such as asmita (VM) and avidya (HA), are the causes that bring
about the advent of vrttis. Or (VM) it may be said that as prakrti
serves purusha, only its rajasic and tamasic vrttis are the cause of
klesha. This view of VM 1s, however, a limited one, as it contra-
dicts the statements made just above with regard to the need for
Vanquishing the sattvic vrttis also. In any case, vrttis (VM) caused
by the Aleshas lead to further k/eshas.

According to VB the word heru (cause) actually means a pur-
pose, an effect. KleShas, too, are the effects of the vrttis. The main
klesha (VB) 1s pain (duhkha), which is the effect produced by the
140 SOTRAIS
vrttis that take the form of objects experienced; hence, it is klishta.
The kleShas cause affliction and pain by causing inversion (HA)
of awareness (viparyastra-pratyaya), turning the inward conscious-
ness outward so that awareness does not dwell in the seer’s own
(MA) nature. These klishta vyttis are a particular mutation of the
mind-field (AD) invaded (BR, AD) by the kleShas, rooted in (HA)
and consisting of the kleshas.
Again, Vyasa:
These (vrttis) become the field for the abundant growth of the
domain of karmas (Karma@shaya).
Here the word karmdashaya needs to be understood. It is that
domain of the mind-field on which are left the impressions of all
(a) experiences from the objective world without, and (5) vrttis
from the mental world within. These impressions, sarhnskaras, have
internal currents of their own. When certain sarhskaras, by con-
stant addition of like impressions, become strong enough, the pro-
pensities they create impel a person in a certain direction. The
choices thus made produce pain or pleasure in the process of re-
incarnation (YS 11.13). The substratum of this process within the
mind-field is called the karmaShaya, or the domain of karmas.
Because vrttis arise only for the purpose of acquisition of kleshas,
they become the field for abundant growth of the karmashaya
(VM). The person in this pursuit makes his determination with
vrttis such as valid proof (prama@na), etc (YS 1.6). Then, whether
attracted or repelled, he adds to the karma@shaya. Thus it 1s that
vfttis can serve as the ground for the generation of an abundance
of virtue or vice (VM). These (VB) vrttis become the supporting
ground for a multitude of propensities (va@sands) for virtue or vice.
A person smitten by a craving caused by vrttis that take the form
of objects of experience undertakes to overcome the craving by
pursuits such as injuriousness or compassion, thereby gathering
vice or virtue. Thus begins the stream of sorrow. This, then, is the
nature of klishza vrttis, which are (RY) the cause of afflictions like
attraction and aversion (raga and dvesha) (YS 11.7,8), with bond-
age as their fruit. That is, every being is
SUTRA ILS 141
» bound to pleasure and so on
« by having performed actions (karma)
« because of attraction, aversion, etc
« towards the matters that he has come to know
* with vrttis such as valid proof.

We need to remember that virtue arising from sattva is only
relatively desirable. Virtue exists only in comparison to vice. A
yogi’s action, however, is beyond all concepts of black and white
(YS I1V.7), and the sattva of the lower samadhi is transcended in
higher samadhi when the relationship with all gunas is terminated.
Here the a-klishta vrttis replace the former afflicted ones. These
unafflicted vrttis are as purely sattvic as it is possible for a material
evolute to be. Hence they, unlike the afflicted ones, produce no
further kleshas. Vyasa’s commentary reads:

The unafflicted vrttis are those whose subject 1s discernment (wiveka-
khyati), and which impede the power of gunas.

A-klishta vrttis (VB) do not result in k/leshas. The kleshas arise
from activity of the gunas, for it 1s the latter’s prerogative or em-
powerment (adhikG@ra) to initiate action, which (VM, VB) continues
up to discernment (k/Ayati)."". Khyats (VM), which means “clarity
of wisdom”™ (prajfid-prasada), occurs when the sattvic aspect of
buddhi has been washed of rajas and tamas and flows tranquilly.
By whatever means discernment (AAyat1) between the spiritual self
and the sattva of buddhi 1s realized, those means are included (VB)
in the clause “whose subject 1s discernment ™ The unafflicted vrttis
help bring about the discernment and reduce the power of the
gunas until the latter have finally fulfilled their purpose. They do
so by opposing or blocking the activation of ignorance (avidyd),
desire (Adma) and the attendant actions (karmas) The result of
a-AltsAta vrttis is liberation (mokgsha). says RY: but this is technt-
cally incorrect A-A/isAta vrttis lead only to discernment, which in
turn leads to asamiprajfdta samadhi and final liberation

10) Advdteas used here in the sense of saveAa-kAydr and not as in Vvasa’s commentary
quoting Pafichashtkha (see pp F29tt )
142, SOTRAIS

What are these unafflicted vrttis? They are the same as pramana,
etc. enumerated in the next stitra. When these are directed towards
worldly objects, they are klishta, and when they are directed in-
wards, they are a-klishta.

It is clear that tamasic vrttis are afflicted (klishta) and sattvic
vrttis are unafflicted (a-klishta). The question arises regarding the
category to which rajasic vrttis might belong. BG says that they are
unafflicted at best or mixed into and included in either sattvic or
tamasic in a specific mental situation. VB also regards them as
mixed, both klishta and a-klishta. However, this disagreement is
solved by remembering that in Sankhya philosophy the function of
rajas is always to impel both sattva and tamas. Without the impel-
ling force of rajas the other two gunas are ineffective and not
efficacious. In this sense the rajasic element may be considered to
be mixed with either sattva or tamas, whichever is dominant, and
therefore sattva or tamas is served or supported by rajas. The
progress of the mind-field towards pure sattva is not possible with-
out the operational capacity of rajas.

A counterargument posed is as follows: Since the liberated ones
seldom incarnate (Nydya-sitra of Gotama III.1.25), it is understood
that all beings, with the exception of liberated incarnations, bear
afflicted vrttis. It would be rare if unafflicted vrttis should arise in
the constant stream of such afflicted vrttis. And even if unafflicted
vrttis were to arise among the afflicted ones, they would be powerless,
having fallen among powerful opponents. Therefore, it is illogical
that afflicted vrttis could be controlled through unafflicted ones, and
the latter, again, through transcendental dispassion (para-vairagya)
(VM) Against this pessimism, however, Vyasa shows optimism:

These (unafflicted vrttis) remain unafflicted even when fallen in
the currents of the afflicted ones They remain unafflicted also in
the intervals of the afflicted ones.

The afflicted vrttis also (appear) in the intervals of the unaf-
flicted ones

Practice and dispassion (abhydasa and vairagya) (YS 1.12-16) are
the unafflicted vrttis par excellence, even though not enumerated
SOTRALS 143
among the five. Or it may be said that these two arise (VM, HA,
RY) from a-klishta vrttis, for example (VM), from

eagama: textual authority, one of the valid proofs (pramanas), or

eanumdana: inference, another pramdna leading to a spiritual con-

clusion, or

«the instruction of a teacher and contemplation thereon.

When practice and dispassion cause a break (HA) in the flow of
afflictions, the vrttis leading to a higher good (paramartha) arise.
Even though these latter vrttis arise in the stream of afflictions and
afflicted vrttis, they remain untouched by them (VM, VB, HA) and
are not corrupted. The same applies to unafflicted vrttis that appear
in intervals between afflicted vrttis.

Similarly, when unafflicted vrttis begin to flow, their stream is
often interrupted by afflicted ones. However, these corrupt vrttis
have no power to alter the purer ones; rather, as the purer vrttis
grow in strength through repeated practice, their sarnskdras grad-
ually mature, and the impure vrttis are brought under control.
Then as dispassion grows and becomes para-vairdgya, even the
pure vrttis are discarded (VM, VB, HA, RY, MA). A few examples
of vrttis becoming unafflicted (a-klishta) may be given as follows
(NTC):

pramana: proof—is unafflicted when it leads to perception of
the self.

viparyaya: perverse cognition—helps one to gain merit when one
superimposes the idea of divinity upon an icon.

vikalpa imaginary cognition—is beneficial when the great sen-
tences (mahd-vakyas) of Vedanta, such as “Thou art That,”
leave some purificatory imprint on the mind, even when they
have not been fully understood.

nidra- sleep (cf. Sitra 1.38)—1s of value when it causes one to
experience sattvic pleasure.

smrt memory-—helps when, upon seeing worldly objects such
as the blue sky, one is reminded of the descriptions of appear-
ances of one’s favourite incarnation of the Deity

Does it necessarily mean, then, that once an aspirant has begun
his or her practice success is assured, and that the vrttis associated
144. SOTRAIS

with kleshas have no more power over the aspirant? This may be

answered in two ways:

1. VyAsa has rejected the disciples with distracted (vikshipta) minds
as unworthy of consideration as serious yogis (YS 1.1). He is not
talking about them.

2. The wording of most commentators suggests that unafflicted
vrttis have to be strengthened through practice and dispassion
until they cease to be intermittent and create a flow (pravaha).
Then the Klishta vrttis arising intermittently have no more power
and will soon be conquered.

This is the essence of what Vy4sa says:

The vrttis produce their own kind of sarhsk4aras, and in turn, the
sathnskaras produce identical vrttis. Thus the wheel of vrttis and
sarhskaras revolves incessantly.

Samsk4ras are the intangible and inactive state of vrttis, and the
vrttis are the tangible and active outcome of sarnskaras (HA). The
only way this wheel of sarnskaras and vrttis can be stopped (stam-
bhana) and the mind-field dissolved (pra/aya) is through the prac-
tice of nirodha. Until then the struggle for supremacy continues
between the afflicted and the unafflicted vrttis.

This process may be further elaborated upon: Even when a
person’s mind-field is filled with impure vrttis, the purer vrttis arise
in many ways. For example: sarnskaras of pure vrttis from past
lives remain dormant. While the karmas are maturing in the current
lite, and some impure karmas have already matured and fructified,
the purer samsk4ras from the past arise and produce purer vrttis.
This may occur (a) when some external stimulant of a pure nature
1s presented to the mind (e.g , a sattvic or beautiful view, an “acci-
dental” glance at an uplifting text, an inspiring sermon heard upon
the invitation or insistence of friends, and so torth) or (6) when the
pain and sorrow produced through worldly pursuits jolts one into
dispassion and renunciation, or even a mild re-examination of
one’s values These processes may occur (a) spontaneously, even in
SOTRAES 145
the middle of an impure stream, or (b) during the interruptions
that occur in the impure flow. The impure vrttis still arise during
the interruptions in the flow of pure ones (YS IV.27), but even-
tually—after the practice of austerities, restraints, yamas and ni-
yamas and meditation ceases to be a painful discipline and be-
comes a habit and a natural inclination—negative emotions and
painful thoughts seldom arise. Finally, the power of impure vrttis
is broken and the pure vrttis form a stream; the intermittent appear-
ance of impure vrttis no longer threatens the spiritual inclination
and is soon conquered.

Again, Vyasa:

When the mind-field becomes such that it has completed the
work within its authority, it stands on its own.
Or it even goes into dissolution.

“When the mind-field becomes such” means that it is controlled

and progressing towards nirodha-samadhi. It has completed the

work of (a) bhoga—presenting experiences to the spiritual self—
and (b) apavarga—serving as vehicle of the thoughts of liberation.

Now the mind-field withdraws from its domain of authority and

the field of service in three stages:

1. Only the sarnskaras remain without activating vrttis (YS 1.18).
There are (VB) no more conflicts and pains in the mind. Then it
reaches the samadhi of the raincloud of virtue and of the knowl-
edge of the nature of all things (dharma-megha) (YS 1V.29)
(HA), in which (VM) the mind dwells 1n itself, by itself. But this
stage (VM) 1s not the goal; it 1s merely incidental (@pdtatah) on
the way to the final step.

2 We have translated Vyasa’s phrase atma-kalpena to mean “stands
on its own”, that 1s, the mind dwells in itself, by itself. Here we
can go further.

a) The mind, being sattvic, is reflective. It reflects the light of the
pure self, and all the objects of experience reflect in it, be-
coming vrttis. It takes the form of whatever reflects in it and
identifies with it.
146 SOTRAIS
b) In samadhi there are no objects of experience, but only the
light of the spiritual self reflecting in the mind, with the result
that it now identifies only with the spiritual self. At this stage
Vydsa’s phrase, atma-kalpena, is understood to mean: iden-
tifying with the self (atman), imagining itself to be the self, as
close to self in purity as it is capable of becoming (YS II1.55).
3. As the practice deepens further (VB) (abhyasa-pdtavena), the
sarnsk4ras are burnt (NB) from the individual mind-field, which
now goes through the process of prati-prasava, dissolution into
final prakrti (YS 1V.34), following the Sankhya scheme of prati-
savichara, the cosmic principle of the orderly dissolution of evo-
lutes (TSS 7). This is the total and permanent (a@tyantika) ter-
mination of the relationship between self and non-self.

This dissolution of the mind-field may be mistaken for liberation
(moksha or mukti) (as in RY), and may be referred to as videha-
kaivalya (as in VB), the state of becoming bodiless even when
dwelling in the body. The point needs to be made that YS 1.19
considers the videha state to be far lower than final isolation (kai-
valya), although the dissolution of the individual mind-field into
the original and final prakrti is an inevitable stage in the process of
liberation. The individual yogi who has accomplished this is called
jivan-mukta, liberated yet not disincarnate, still maintaining the
body; this state 1s known as jivan-mukuti, liberation while yet incar-
nate

The final dissolution (pra/ava) of the mind-field cannot occur in
a sivan-mukta, who yet needs the mind as an instrument of keeping
the physical body operative, although the mind does come very
close to the pra/aya state in the samadhi of a sivan-mukta. The
videha-mukti by itself, however, is not the definition of asam-
prajfidta or seedless (nir-bija) samadhi ( YS 1.18.51) or of kaivalya
(YS IV.34), which are not states of mind but simply the self dwell-
ing in the self. without reference to a material evolute such as the
mind The final liberation while the self is yet incarnate means not
ever (WB) leaving the state of samadhi, the self dwelling in the self,
even when carrying on the mental, corporeal, and social duties,
SUTRALS 147
which the yogi continues to perform, out of compassion, to help
liberate others.

In conclusion: In dharma-megha, mind dwells in itself, and then
identifies with the spiritual self. In asamprajfidta and kaivalya, the
self dwells in the self.
148 SUTRA 1.6
Sitral6  warrtradataacatrareqa: |
pramana-viparyaya-vikalpa-nidra-smrtayah
pramana-: valid proofs
viparyaya-: perversive cognition
vikalpa-: imaginary cognition, linguistic misconception
nidra-: sleep, and
smrtayah: (smrti) memory
The fivefold vrttis of the mind are: valid proofs, perversive cog-
nition, imaginary cognition, sleep and memory.
Vyasa’s Commentary
Those afflicted and unafflicted vrttis divided into five are
[Sutra:] valid proofs, perversive cognition, imaginary cognition,
sleep and memory.
SOTRAI7 149
Sitra 1.7 WATATATA: WATT
pratyakshanumanagamah pramanani
pratyaksha-: direct perception
anumana-: inference
agamah: and (textual, scriptural, inspired, revealed) authority
pram@n4ni: proofs
Direct perception, inference and revealed authority are the three
categories of the vrtti called valid proof (pramdna).
Vyasa’s Commentary

The mind-field is drawn towards, attracted to and coloured by
an external (upa-raga) substance through the channels of the senses.
With that as its object, a modification (vrtti) is produced in the
mind-field; this vrtti is the valid proof (pram@na) called direct
perception (pratyaksha). It determines, primarily, the specific in a
matter that consists of the general and the specific.

The result is the purusha-originated, undistinguished apprehen-
sion of the vrtti in the mind-field. Purusha is the cause of buddhi’s
accurate apprehension. This we shall establish later.

Inference (anumd@na) is the vrtti determining primarily the gen-
eral, having as its object that connection of the inferable which
conforms to the homogeneous and excludes the non-homogeneous.
For example, “The moon and the star have movement because
they are seen to arrive at another locus,” or “The Vindhya mountain
does not move, for it 1s not seen to arrive at another locus.”

A matter seen or inferred by an accomplished person is taught
in the form of words in order to transfer one’s knowledge into
another The vrtt: from that word, with its matter and meaning as
the object, 1s the listener’s acquisition (agama)

That @gama overwhelms one whose teacher has not seen or
inferred the matter correctly and whose presentation of the matter
cannot be trusted. But the @gama is without such disturbance in
the case of the original teacher.
150 SUTRA IL7
Paraphrase of Vyasa’s Commentary

When the senses present certain information to the mind-field,
there occurs in the mind a certain modification (vrtti) whose object
is the sense data. However, there arises a doubt as to the actual
properties of an object, which also shares certain of its properties
with other objects. The determinative process (ava-dhdrana) helps
the mind to eliminate general shared properties so that it focuses
on the specific. For example, “Is that a person or a post?” In this
question the general shared properties of the person and the post
are eliminated, and by focusing on the specific properties one deter-
mines the visible object to be either a person or a post. This vrtti,
the chief determinant of the specifics, is a valid proof (pramana)
called direct perception (pratyaksha).

Such an apprehension in the mind-field is possible because the
origin of awareness is in purusha, who transmits to the mind its
capacity to perceive. In such an apprehension or perception of a
vrtti, the mind-field itself does not distinguish between its expe-
rience of the object from the external world and the awareness
imparted by purusha. In other words, the objects, the experience,
the vrtti, the mind-field and the awareness of the spiritual self are
not distinguishable one from another. Purusha, however, is the
cause of buddhi’s accurate apprehension.

Discussion

Throughout the history of Indian philosophy there have been
intense debates concerning how many categories of valid proof
there might be. Different schools have each accepted a varying
number according to the internal needs of the particular philosoph-
ical system. Numerous scholarly treatises have detailed the prefer-
ences of these systems and the arguments that developed among
them. The yoga system accepts only three categories of valid proof
(pramana) since these suffice for its purposes:

Pratyaksha_ direct perception
anumdna inference
agama _ scriptural or revealed authority
SUTRAI.7 151
The functions of the valid proofs (pramdnas) accepted by other
systems can be subsumed under these three in one way or another
(VB, NTC) and need not be individually dealt with here (VM,
NTC).

Neither the Yoga-siitras nor Vyasa has defined pramana itself
separately because the derivation of the word is clear and applicable
to all three pram4nas. First, the word pramad means “apprehension
of a state, condition, fact, object or entity (tattva) heretofore not
obtained” (VM, VB). Because the mind is an evolute of matter, all
of its operations such as the logical processes, vrttis like pramanas
and acceptance or rejection of a postulate or a conclusion are in
themselves devoid of consciousness. Like matter itself they are all
unconscious (jada) except through the presence of the conscious-
ness of the spiritual self (chit) (RS); hence prama may be defined
not merely as the apprehension of a state, condition, etc. as just
stated above, but also as the reflection of purusha falling upon the
vrtti, whereby exploration of a matter formerly not known—that
is, an apprehension—occurs (RY, SS). A pramana is the instrument,
means or method for reaching that apprehension (pramd). That
proof (pramdana) is a knowledge that is consistent and cannot be
challenged (a-vi-sam-vddin) (BR, NB).

Direct perception (pratyaksha) is the root of all other proofs,
which in turn depend on it: and therefore pratyaksha comes first
(VM).

Vyasa states:

The mind-field is drawn towards, attracted to and coloured by an
external (upa-rdga) substance through the channels of the senses.
With that as its object. a modification (vrtt!) is produced in the
mind-tield, this vrtti is the valid proof (pramdna) called direct
perception (prat\aksha)
An external substance (vasiu) 1s a requisite in the above statement
(VM), so that the type of superimposition that occurs in the perver-
sive (viparvayva) vrtti (YS 1.8) may be excluded.

Contact between the mind and objects occurs through the senses

Without (a) the objects, (6) the senses as channels of contact, and
152, SOTRAI7

(c) the process of contact, the mind cannot be transmuted into the
form of a given vrtti (VB). The formed apprehension then becomes
the means of verification and the final determinant. The senses are
an important constituent of this process, as we find, for example,
that if a jaundiced eye sees a white conch shell as yellow, there
ensues in the mind the vrtti of a yellow conch shell, which is
contradicted only by the logical processes of induction and deduc-
tion (anvaya and vyatireka) (VB, NB).

The single word upa-raga is translated here as “drawn towards,
attracted to and coloured by.” This threefold process is included in
the meaning of the prefix upa ‘near, closely’ and the verb root rafij
‘to colour, to be drawn towards, to be attracted to’. The primary
meaning of the verb root rafj is “to colour.” The way a clear
crystal is coloured yellow in the proximity of a yellow object is
suggested by upa + rafij = noun, upa-raga. Similarly, when a per-
son is drawn towards another person or a mind is drawn towards
the experience of an object, the same upa-raga takes place, with
the colours of the nearby person or object reflecting in the mind.
In the case of pratyaksha, the “colours” of the object of experience
pass through the channels of the senses. The phrase tad-vishayah
‘with that as its object’ refers in Vyasa’s commentary to the entire
process of colouring the mind in this way, with the mind taking the
form of the vrtti that is being produced. If it were only a mental
perception without an external object and without contact through
the senses, the realist philosophers of the Sankhya-yoga school
would not classify it as a valid direct perception of the pratyaksha
type

Vyasa states:

It (prarvaksha) determines, primarily, the specific in a matter
that consists of the general and the specific
An object of experience or an entity has two aspects:
s@mdn\a_ universal, generic, general
wishesha_ particular, specific, individual
SOTRA 17 153
The word “cow” expresses the cow nature shared by all cows,
without which a specific cow would not be a cow. It also refers to
a specific cow.

The (HA) general, generic, universal (sammdanya), is often signified
by words and is maintained as a mental image referring to the
totality and collectivity of all the possible individuals of that genus.
The specific, particular, individual (vishesha), may be experienced
without any verbal signification. An age-old problem in all philo-
sophical systems, Eastern or Western, is whether the mind’s expe-
rience of an object is of its universal or particular aspect. For
instance, does the mind experience the universal cow, which might
exist in the unmanifest even if all individual cows ceased to exist,
or does it experience the specific cow seen grazing in a particular
pasture?

The philosophers (VM, RS) who subscribe to Kumarila Bhatta’s
interpretation of the Mimarmsa school believe that only the univer-
sals are experienced. On the other hand, Buddhist philosophers
accept no universals, experiencing, as they maintain, only the par-
ticular. Nyaya, the school of logic, believes that an object is en-
dowed with both universal and particular attributes. Each cow has
both universal “cowness” and its individual “cowness” present in
its configuration.

Vyasa’s view is that the object is not endowed (VM, RS, HA)
with some universal or particular attributes, but that there exists
(VM, RY)

tadatmyam: the object in question is both universal and par-

ticular.

In other words, the object denoted by the word “cow,” and/or
observed with the senses, producing a vrtti in the mind, incorpor-
ates all the universal “cowness” and the individual “cowness,” not
apart from the fact that it is a cow. However, for the purpose of
defining pratyaksha, Vyasa states:

It determines the specific in a matter (arrha) that consists of

the general and the specific.
154 SOTRA17

This simply reinforces Sankhya-yoga realism, which holds that
when the senses contact an object, no observation of the universal
is possible. Even though the universal is present (VM) in the par-
ticular, it is secondary for the purpose of the observation.

We have translated the phrase vishesha-avadharana-pradhana
as “it determines, primarily, the specific.” The word “primarily”
indicates that the universal is considered secondary in this instance.
Without its inclusion in pratyaksha, the universal would fail to
serve as a basis for and an aid to inference (a¢numdana), which is the
chief determinant of the concealed universal aspect from the obser-
vation of the particulars.

This realism presents a problem because all the major schools of
Indian philosophy consider yogi-pratyaksha to be the supremely
valid proof. The ordinary person’s direct perception (pratyaksha)
is covered by the statements made so far, and that direct perception
definitely requires the presence of external objects and the mind’s
contact with them through the channels of the senses. But what is
the definition and the process of yogi-pratyaksha? Does Pataiijali
intend to include it? Is it Vydsa’s intent to define it here? Even a
cursory reading of Vyasa’s words leads one to understand that
yvogi-pratyaksha is not meant to be included here and that it will be
described in the Yoga-sitras elsewhere (for example, YS II11.1,17-
19,25-29,33-36,43,49,52,54). Nonetheless, commentators VM, VB,
NB, RY and SS have attempted to classify »ogi-pratyaksha here as
a type of direct perception.

The definition of pratyaksha as given by Vyasa on this sitra 1s
only a pointer (upa-/akshana), (VM, NB) stating a part to include
a larger whole It is a pointer to the implicit, complete idea of
reahization (sa@kshat-kara) and the (VM) viveka-khyat.

Phrases or words like upa-raéga ‘colouring’ are used for the pur-
pose of stating the cause and process of the vrttis produced (VB) in
the mind from external sources. These phrases and words should
not be taken as part of the definition of yogi-pratvaksha,; otherwise
the direct experience of self (€Atman) and of God (igshvara) could
not occur, not being a product of, and not having been induced
through, the contact between objects and senses.
SOTRA 17 155

In the deeper meditation of samprajfiata samadhi, when the
mind is no longer dependent on externals and is clear, there appears
a reflection of the pure consciousness (chiti-Shakti) (RY, SS). This
is direct perception, yogi-pratyaksha.

Even though this siitra and Vyasa’s commentary thereupon do
not speak of yogi-pratyaksha, the view expressed by various com-
mentators is in conformity with and supported by the Yoga-sitras
philosophy in general.

Returning to the common person’s direct perception (pratyak-
sha), Vyasa says:

°°

The result is the purusha-originated, undistinguished apprehension

of the vrtti in the mind-field. Purusha is the cause of buddhi’s

accurate apprehension. This we shall establish later (YS 11.20,

IV.22).
This extract from Vydsa’s commentary was clarified earlier, but is
here presented again. The emphasis in Vydsa’s text is on the result
(phalam). The above sentences are meant to convey the result of
the process of observation and direct perception, which is that a
vrtti occurs in the mind-field. But in and of itself it would be a
“dead” process, because the mind is an unconscious material evolute.
What gives this process of perception and the resultant vrtti a
semblance of life, awareness and consciousness—an apprehension—
is the fact that the vrtti and its substratum, the mind-field, are
being illuminated by the spiritual self (purusha).

The process of proof, any valid experience, is called prama. It
occurs as follows: When the senses are in the proximity of objects,
they cause the mind to become occluded by the tamas of those
objects. At once sattva arises to counter that tamas and an illum-
ination occurs. Such a mingling of tamas and sattva is the valid
experience (pramd) Sattyva cannot rise all by itself except when
impelled by the power of consciousness (chii-Shakt). In other
words it 1s the grace of this spiritual force alone that causes valid
experience The hght of consciousness from within reflecting in
buddhi and illuminating the tamas of the objects being reflected
156 SOTRAI.7
therein from outside constitutes the experience. Buddhi by itself is
incapable of creating such a process (AD). This is what is meant
by
the purusha-originated . . . apprehension of the vytti in the mind-
field.
The complete phrase, however, is:
the purusha-originated, undistinguished apprehension of the vytti
in the mind-field.
What is meant by “undistinguished” (a-vishishja)? It means simply
that (HA) the mind then sees itself as not distinguished from the
purusha, through whose illumination the mind-field experiences
apprehension of the vrtti. The vrtti and the purusha’s illumination
thereof thus becoming undistinguished, the mind then says, “I am
the conscious seer.” Thus the mental processes of the person are
mistaken as being processes of the self, the illumination, the mind
and the vrtti becoming one. This is the end result, called prama,
and the means thereto is pramana, the process of the proof. This is
the explanation offered by the commentators (VM, HA, SS) who
are true to the original intent of Vyasa. VB takes up the word
paurusheya, which can be translated as “purusha-originated” (as
has been done here) or as “purusha’s own.” In the case of the
latter, Vyasa’s sentence would be translated as:
The result is purusha’s undistinguished apprehension of the vrtt
of the mind-field
But VB says that is not possible. If a vrtti occurs in the mind-field,
how can it affect purusha” If an axe is being used to cut an oak
tree, how can that activity fell a maple tree instead? It is not the
self who becomes undistinguished from the mind and its vrttis; it 1s
rather the mind that assumes the characteristics of the self’s illu-
mination.
SOTRA 17 157

Purusha is the cause of buddhi’s accurate apprehension. This we

shall establish later ( YS 11.20, IV.22).
Just as a flame is but the tip, the end result, of the process called
the lamp—with its vessel, oil and wick—so a vrtti is but the tip of
the buddhi (NB). It is for this reason that a concentrated (ekdgra)
mind is compared to a lamp where there is no breeze (BAG V1.19).
When, for example, a vrtti concerning a jar occurs, the mind knows
only “this is a jar.” But that “I know a jar” is a wholly different
vrtti, in which the mind’s assuming the role of the self is clearer. It
is a servant pretending to be the master, rather than only serving
him.

As explained earlier, VB holds the view that a reflection of
buddhi with its vrttis falling on the purusha causes purusha to
know the vrttis. We have already refuted that view as not being in
conformity with the formal Sankhya-yoga view. Therefore his ex-
planations (supported by NB, BG) of the phrases

paurusheyah chitta-vrtti-bodhah: purusha’s knowledge of the
vrttis of the mind
and
buddeh pratisamvedi purushah: purusha apprehends in associa-
tion with buddhi
are also inaccurate.

VB also seems to resent the realism of Sankhya as the major
philosophical approach of the Yoga-suétras and throughout attempts
an interpretation whereby the Yoga-sitras may be read in the hight
of the idealism of Vedanta, stopping a few steps short of the ex-
treme idealism of the Viyiana-vada school of Buddhism. VB’s view
is that the spiritual self has a myriad rays that it radiates . Some of
these rays illuminating the mind produce vrttis. Like a lamp’s flame
illuminating many objects, the vrttis’ lights emanate outwards
through the senses and take the form of the objects perceived. The
\rttis that are experienced in dream and meditation do not arise
from memories of prior experiences induced externally. They are
\rttis emanating from the light of the self remaining in the mind-
158 SUTRA 17
field. They have not radiated further out through the sense channels
to become one with the world of objects.

This is in conformity with the Vedanta view that all experiences
are emanations of Brahman. It should not, however, be confused
with the view of the Vijfiana-vada Buddhists, as the following
quotation clearly shows: “We believe,” says VB, “that the objects
perceived are also independent emanations with which the vrtti-
emanations join in the phenomenal world.” The VijAana-vadin does
not accept the independent real existence of objects of perception
in the phenomenal world.

This stand seems to negate the necessity for the entire process of
the reflection of objects falling upon the mind-field through the
senses. VB might well have written an independent philosophical
treatise of his own rather than presenting his own thoughts as an
exposition of Vyasa’s commentary. Therefore throughout the re-
mainder of this work his comments in regard to this question will
be ignored.

Now, to inference (anumdana). Vyasa says:

Inference (anumd4na) 1s the vrtti determining primarily the gen-

eral...
As explained in the case of direct perception (pratyaksha), the
senses perceive a specific object. This is not the case with inference
(anumana). Seeing a specific flood of waters in a stream, one infers
that there is snow melting in the mountains. The snow, whose
existence and melting 1s inferred, 1s not any specific snow that has
been seen, it 1s the universal idea “snow” that 1s present in the
mind It is not the particular snowfall we saw last year while hiking
in the mountains. This does not preclude the fact that a specific
snow is melting. If we were perceiving it with our eyes, it would be
that specific snow, but the specific 1s subordinate to the general in
the process of inference and occurs only after the inference is
completed. We have translated the phrase s@mdanya-ava-dhdarana-
pradhana as “determining primarily.” A reading of the explanation
of a similar phrase regarding pratyaksha, above, will clarify this
translation.
SOTRAI7 159
Now, again, according to Vyasa, inference (amumdna) has
as its object that connection of the inferable which conforms to
the homogeneous and excludes the non-homogeneous.
This can be illustrated by the standard example of a five-membered
syllogism of Nydya, the Indian system of logic:
1. proposition (prarijfia): The mountain has fire.
2. cause (hetu): Because it has smoke.
3. exemplification (drshtanta): Whatever has smoke has fire,
- like a kitchen hearth,
- unlike a body of water.
4. recapitulation of cause (upanaya): The mountain has smoke.
5. conclusion (migamana): The mountain has fire.
Or another example:
A pot is non-eternal.
Because it is a product
Like other objects, such as a cloth, which being products, are
non-eternal
A pot is a product.
Being a product, a pot 1s non-eternal.
In both of these examples the attributes—“having smoke” and
“being a product”—indicate an invariant association (a common-
ality, a homogeneity) inherent between the cause and the exempli-
fication. Any one of the elements of the syllogism by itself has no
potency --called shakri in formal logic—to produce any conclusion.
It is the invariant association (such as the association implicit in
the statement that “where there 1s smoke there 1s fire”), the homo-
geneity, that helps to produce a conclusion.
Now, to the third valid proot (@gama). Vyasa says:
A matter seen or interred by an accomplished person (dpsa) 1s
taught in the form of words to transfer one’s knowledge into
another The vrtts from that word, with its matter and meaning
as the object, is the listener’s acquisition (agama)
160 SOTRAI7
Some of the original words in these sentences are important to
understand: An 4@pta is an accomplished one, he who has attained.
The word 4Gpta is from the verb root ap ‘to attain, accomplish,
find’. The attainment (@pt¢i) in this sense is more technically defined
as connecting together (qa) the realization of reality (tattva-darshana),
(6) compassion (karunya), that is, the motivation to eradicate the
suffering of others, and (c) strength of the senses and body and
expertise in the use thereof (karana-pdfava). This defines the quali-
fications of a realized teacher. He has to be (VB) free of weak-
nesses and faults such as confusion, negligence, desire for personal
gain, failure in control over the senses and inability to use the
senses properly. One with such an attainment is an dpta, a noble
teacher. It is also said that one is an @pta (HA) to a student by
whose words that particular student is able to reach a conclusion,
determination or conviction to which the student’s own rational
thought (vichara) had not yet led him. Vydsa’s words,

A matter seen or inferred by an apta,
mean that inference alone, that is, rational or logical processes of
thought, does not make one an authority (@pra). First comes the
fact of drshia, having seen, realized in the state of samadhi. It is
because of such an msight (a realization within) that a school of
philosophy 1s called dargshana: a vision, insight, a realization (from
the verb root drsh ‘to see’). The matter thus seen, says Vyasa,

1s taught in the form of words
or by the means (HA) of silent gesture, etc., as many yogis do.
Shabdena means “through words,” “in the form of words,” and
“with the accompaniment of words.” All of these meanings are
applicable here. The last one 1s especially significant because verbal
guidance may often accompany an initiation in which a guru’s
knowledge 1s transferred to another-—-often without words. This
transfusion of knowledge 1s not emphasized here, but merely sug-
gested to those who have gone through the experience and can
therefore read between the lines
SOTRAIL7 161
The matter is taught in the form of words, says Vyasa,

to transfer one’s knowledge into another.
Not “to another” but “into (paratra) another.” This means (VM,
VB, NB, HA, RY) that the knowledge similar to that in the teacher's
own thought waves of the mind-field (chitta-vrtti) should appear in
the chitta-vrtti of the listener (Shrozr), that is, a student. In the
tradition, the first stage of the study is listening to the teaching.
This teaching should be imparted with the intention (VM) that
what is beneficial to the student should accrue, and what is not
beneficial should be prevented. It is all of these qualifications and
processes that constitute valid proof (agama), which literally means
“that which comes” into the student. The vrtti of the words, with
their (a) intended and (d) inherent meanings arising in the student’s
mind, is gama. That is the noble authority, a revealed knowledge,
conveyed into the student directly by the teacher into whom it was
revealed, or through a lineage, or in the form of sacred texts.

Further, Vyasa says:

That @gama overwhelms one whose teacher has not seen or in-

ferred the matter correctly and whose presentation of the matter

cannot be trusted.
On the other hand, there may be teachers who are trusted and
accepted even though they have neither realized nor inferred the
matter themselves, but are faithfully presenting the knowledge orig-
inally imparted by the founder of the lineage. Vyasa says:

But the agama is without such disturbance in the case of the

original teacher
These lines can be read both as (a) in the case of an original
teacher, a human founder of the lineage. and (5) in the case of the
original teacher (God). whose revealed knowledge (Veda) 1s con-
veyed through teachers who themselves may not have realized or
interred the contents thereof. This 1s Ggama, revealed authority,
the third valid proof.
162. SOTRA18
Sitra 1.8 Prada frearararrarqaatassy
viparyayo mithy4-jiianam a-tad-ripa-
pratishtham
viparyayah: perversive cognition
mithya-jfiadnam: false knowledge
a-tad-rijpa-: not in the nature, form, of that (object)
pratishtham: established
False knowledge without a basis in the nature or form of the
respective object is the vrtti called perversive cognition (vipar-
yaya).
Vyasa’s Commentary
Why is this not a valid proof? Because it is refuted, contradicted
and annulled by a valid proof. A valid proof has a real substance
for its object. It 1s commonly seen that a non-proof is contradicted
by a proof. For example, if someone with double vision sees two
moons, this perception is refuted by the sight of the single moon.
This ignorance (avidya@) consists of five sections:
avid\d nescience
asmud  |-am-ness
raga attachment
dvesha aversion
abhinivesha tear of death
the tive afflictions (A/eshas) (YS 113) These very five bear their
real names as follows
darkness,
stupor,
great stupor,
nocturnal, and
blind nocturnal'
TL We have borrowed the phrase “perversive cognition” as the translation of wpartava
from the translation of Bangali Baba
SOTRAI8 163
We shall speak of these further in the context of the impurities
(mala) of the mind-field.
Discussion

Perversive cognition (viparyaya) is false knowledge (mith)a@-jfidna)
not established, having no basis (pratishtha) in the nature or form
of that object of which this purports to be the knowledge.

Perversive cognition (viparyaya) is defined as false knowledge
(mithya-jfidna) (VM, VB, BG, NB), which is then explained as
“not established,” etc. It gives the impression of being a cognition
or a knowledge, but is (VM) either

tad-riipa-a-pratishtham: not established in, having no basis in,
the form of that which is,
or
a-tad-réipa-pratishtham: established in a form or nature not of
that object.
In other words, (VB) perversive cognition has its basis in some
other object, which does not correspond to the given object's true
aspect. It does not reveal the ultimate (p@ramarthika) nature of
that object (BR), as when a seashell appears to be a silver coin
(BR) But this type of cognition 1s simply a flow within the mind
(HA) whereby a vrtti of buddhi is attributed to (VB, BG. NB) the
object in question. It means that when such a superimposition is
further examined and thereby contradicted, the object is found to
be unable to perform the functions that 1t would have been capable
ot had the talse tmpression been accurate (SS). Only if, though it
may be contradicted, it is nonetheless efticactous in practice, can it
(RY) be considered accurate.

Lest the definition and the discussion be regarded as irrelevant
to the needs of a spiritual aspirant. BR employs the term param-
artha, the ultimate nature (of an object) This suggests that we are
interested not merely in ordinary objects of our sense experience
but in the totality of the universe All our cognition of the universe
turns out to be false. impractical and inefficacious when. tollowing
164 SUTRA I8

Sankhya, we finally discover its ultimate nature to be the equilib-
rium of prakrti, and, following Vedanta, we find Brahman, the
transcendental (which is also a translation of paramartha), to be
the true reality onto which this universe has been superimposed.
The definition of viparyaya also includes doubt (sarmShaya), except
that the fact of “not being established” applies only to the mental
process (e.g., “Is that a man or a post?”) (BR). Here the possibility
of something opposite to its nature is present until the determina-
tion is made.

The question arises as to why the definition of viparyaya as
given in this siitra does not include also linguistic misconception
(vikalpa), which 1s defined in the next siitra. Since vikalpa, too, is
a false cognition, one might expect it to be included here. The
answer is given (VM, NB, RY, SS) that in the case of viparyaya it
must be possible for an ordinary, non-philosophical person to be
able to contradict the false impression by simple practical expe-
rience. In vikalpa we are dealing with matters open only to the
philosophically conversant, as will be seen in the next sitra. In
viparyaya there has to be an object whose form or nature can be
experienced (NB). In the case of vikalpa, if one says, for example,
“rabbit's horn,” there is no particular object that is being miscon-
strued as that horn, nor does the experience confirm the existence
of some object in the place of that non-existent horn. The horn is
merely a word referring to nothing. Hence wkalpa cannot be in-
cluded in viparvaya

Furthermore, in the case of viparyaya there has to be an agree-
ment among all the viewers who have good vision (for example,
“there was no silver, only a glinting seashell”). In the case of philo-
sophical positions of the type presented by Vyasa on YS 1.9 and
considered by him as viAalpa, there 1s never an agreement among
different philosophers (RY, SS)

In other words, all intellectually held philosophical positions
and purely mental experiences which have been proved false are
considered wAa/pa. When, for instance, a text says, “All things,
such as the earth, are all in the mind and never outside; the experi-
ence of them as real is as in dreams, delusions and intoxication,”
SOTRA 18 165
the experience described is a vikalpa (BG, NB). Thus dreams also
fall in the category of vikalpa (VB, BG, NB) because they are
purely mental and no specific object replaces a dream object.

Now to Vyasa:
Why is this (viparyaya) not a valid proof? Because it is...
contradicted . .. by a valid proof.
This question and answer means that the imaginary experience
produced by viparyaya is not valid, because it is later contradicted
by a valid proof. Here the logicians may argue with regard to the
relative strength of an anterior and posterior statement and experi-
ence. Between a prior or a posterior experience, which is the more
reliable? The rules as established by the Mimarhsa school are that
where the posterior originates from the anterior, or the posterior’s
(a) existence as an object or (5) validity as an idea in some way
depends on the anterior, it is the anterior that is considered more
powerful.
Mimamsa also states that
an anterior is normally contradicted by the posterior, the poster-
lor arising after contradicting the anterior. But it is inconceivable
for an anterior to arise or be established by contradicting a not-
yet-experienced posterior.
In other words,
where the posterior does not arise directly from an anterior and
Its existence as an object or the validity as an idea 1s not depen-
dent thereupon, then the posterior 1s stronger than the anterior
and has the power to contradict it and to establish itself When
two intelligent suggestions or impressions arise independently of
each other, the posterior overpowers and condemns the anterior.
Applied to viparvaya this means that when for example a perceiver
has the impression that he saw a silver coin (the anterior impres-
sion), it 1s not out of that impression that the latter impression (“It
166 SOTRAI8&

is a seashell and not a silver coin”) originates. The posterior impres-
sion, that it is a seashell, rises from a fresh examination. The silver
coin impression is not the originating cause of the seashell impres-
sion. Thus, according to the rules of Mimamsa, the posterior is the
valid proof proving the anterior to be a false impression. The
posterior is the pramdana, the anterior is viparyaya. Hence, one
must concur with Vyasa:

Why is this (viparyay'a) not a valid proof? Because it is refuted,

contradicted and annulled by a valid proof. A valid proof has a

real substance for its object. It is commonly seen that a non-

proof is contradicted by a proof. For example, if someone with
double vision sees two moons, this perception is refuted by the
sight of the single moon.

The Sankhya-yoga philosophers are realists. As was seen in the
discussion on pratyaksha in Sitra 1.7, the reality of a substance or
object must be confirmed by all the senses involved. For example,
silver must be seen with the eyes to be so, must tinkle like silver to
the ear and must feel like silver to the tactile sense. The perception
must be consistent; that is, all the senses must experience the object
the same way at all times, and the observations of all the perceivers
must be consistent. All the senses of all the observers must confirm
the reality the same way at all times. Such a proof contradicts any
perception of lesser consistence and proves the latter to be a vipar-
yaya

It 1s the natural inclination of intelligence to be partial to, to be
inclined towards, reahty (VB): hence this vwparrara is rejected. 1s
treated as contemptible, and needs to be eradicated in all cases.
Until the experience (VB) of an object or entity so occurs that it
would not be contradicted later, the nature of that entity cannot be
considered as tinally ascertained.

It is well here to explain differences among selected Sanskrit
words dealing with the concept of error. Knowledge (AAya@ti) is the
opposite of error An error may be

a-hAyati non-apprehension
or
ansatha-Ahyanu misapprehension
SUTRAI8 167
The Sankhya system proper uses the term a-viveka, “an absence of
the correct knowledge” of the nature of purusha, which the teachers
of formal logic then place under the category of non-perception
(a-khyati). It appears that the yoga system is a little different in
this regard. It considers error to be a misapprehension (VB), the
definition of ignorance or nescience (avidya) being “mistaking the
self to be non-self,” as in YS 11.3.'2
Now Vyasa:

This ignorance (avidyd) consists of five sections.
In other words, ignorance (avidyda), which from here on will be
referred to as nescience, defined in YS 11.3 and II.5, falls within the
category of viparyaya. This nescience is paficha-parva, “having five
sections.” The word parvan ‘section’ refers to segments of a bamboo
or sections of mountain chains. It is used where an object consists
of many segments but constitutes a single object. It is not that
many segments are brought from different places to put together a
bamboo, but the bamboo itself consists of the segments. So, nes-
cience is not made up of its five sections, but they are all part of
the same one ignorance or nescience. These are the very five afflic-
tions (k/eshas) enumerated in YS I1.3 as

avidyd: nescience or ignorance

asmiutaé: \-am-ness

raga attachment

dvesha. aversion

ahhinivesha fear of death
Nescience 1s a factor (VM) common to all the afflictions, hence the
rest ure considered its segments. It is (VB) the seed of the calamity
called samsdara, the revolving cycles of the great wheel, including
transmigration. The vrtt! wiparvaya, misapprehension, therefore
must be brought under control (nirodha).
12 Many ditterent theories regarding erroneous percepuon have been discussed in different
Schools of Indian philosophy and retuted by the various Commentators but need not be
hea Students interested in such detail may reter to the vanous texts on Indian
168 SUTRALS8&

Now to Vydsa’s enumeration of the five segments of nescience.
The other more poetic terms, darkness, etc., follow the scheme of
Sankhya-karika 48, which states:

tamas: darkness (eight kinds),

moha: stupor (eight kinds),

maha-moha: great stupor (ten types),

tamisra: nocturnal (eighteenfold), and
andha-tadmisra: blind nocturnal (eighteenfold).

These divisions are explained (VM, VB) as follows:

1. Avidya: nescience (YS 11.5): tamas (darkness) is eightfold: The
error of mistaking as 4tman (the self) the eight that are:

i. a-vyakta: unmanifest prakrti and its evolutes
it. mahat: buddhi
ii. ahamkara: ego

1V-Viil. fan-matras: the five subtle elements

It 1s darkness because (VB) it veils jid@na (knowledge). It includes
the error of identifying (VB) body, etc. as self because body, etc.
are the products of the eight listed above. Viparyayas (per-
versive cognitions), such as between silver and a seashell, are not
included in this category. Sa€nkhya-karikd 44 says that bondage
1s caused by viparyaya. Hence avidyda, the major cause of bon-
dage, is included here and not the minor confusions.

2. Asmutad: I-am-ness ( YS 11.6): moha (delusion) is eightfold: The
error of considering the eight siddhis (YS 11145), powers or
accomplishments, as though they were something benevolent
and belonging to the self (a@tmiya) (VB), whereas they are actually
the opposite (RY)

anima the power to become minute

laghima the power to become hght

prdptu the power to reach or touch the most distant things

prakhdmya_ the power by which all that one may wish can be
tulfilled
SOTRAI8& 169
mahima: the power to become large
iShitva: physical, vocal and mental lordship, not impeded by any
vaShitva: control over all elements and beings; ability to
create, rearrange or dissolve them
kamdavasdyitad: whatever one says or intends with the mind
comes true (whereas in others’ case it conflicts and is not
fulfilled)

I-am-ness and possession (svatva) are synonymous and therefore

the above divisions apply, the siddhis being a form of possessive

power.

3. Raga: attraction (YS H.7): maha-moha (great stupor) is tenfold:
“I shall attain the eightfold siddhis through yoga. | shall attaina
lordship, becoming an adept siddha. Thereby | shall enjoy the
objects of the ten senses, such as sounds, both that are commonly
tangible (drshta) and that are ordinarily intangible but which
are spoken of by the authoritative sources (@nushravika).” Any
such other inclination is included in the tenfold great stupor
(maha-moha) or attraction (raga).

4. Dvesha: aversion (YS 11.8): t@misra (nocturnal) is eighteenfold:
When one is bent upon the above pursuits and some (VB) im-
pediment prevents the attainment of asmitd (the eight siddhis)
and raga (the ten enjoyments of the senses), then the anger
arising with regard to that failure and towards its cause is noc-
turnal (ta@misra) or aversion (dvesha).

5. Abhinivesha: fear of death ( YS 11.9): andha-tamisra (blind noc-
turnal) is eighteenfold: asmita (the eight siddhis) and raga (the
ten objects of the senses) having been attained, there yet comes
the realization that all this will perish at the (VB) end of a cycle
ot creation (kalpa) Such fear is that of the blind night (andha-
rtamusra) or the tear of death (abhinivesha) The mght, here, 1s
that of the period of dissolution in a single cycle of creation.

In the above order of five, each succeeding Alesha 1s considered
more undesirable and of a lower grade than its predecessor, indi-
cating progressively lower and yet lower levels of spiritual realiza-
tion It 1s also interesting to note that the above definitions seem to
170 SOTRAI8
be of concern only to the advanced yogi. The definitions as pro-
vided under YS II.5-9 are wider and are applicable even to the
majority of people, who are in kshipta and midha states of mind.
The following scheme shows viparyaya from the common person’s
viewpoint compared to the viewpoint of one whose consciousness
has become more refined and subtle, whose horizons of space and
time, though far wider, have not yet reached final isolation (kai-
valya):
Klesha Common View Imperfect Yogi’s View
avidya Iam the body, male or Iam prakrti and its
female, with consequent evolutes.
pleasures and attractions.
asmua I have an identity; I desire I desire siddhis.
success, power and wealth.
raga I desire the objects of my I will use my siddhis to
immediate pleasure. obtain the intangible
universals of refined
pleasures.
dvesha I am averse to specific I am angry at causes,
objects, persons or persons or situations that
situations that have caused have prevented my
me pain. fulfilment of siddhis and
consequent enjoyments.
abhinevesha | fear my death, that is,the _I fear that all my powers and
death of this body that Iam. consequent pleasures and
enjoyments of the universal
evolutes will cease at the end
of a Aalpa
Even when a whole universe is provided as the body of a highly
evolved yogi. the above viparvavas or kleshas remain at the indi-
cated scale until pure liberation is reached In the mythological
literature of India called the Puranas, the five alternative names of
vipar\avas (tamas, moha, maha-moha, tamisra and andha-tamisra)
are five of the numerous hells into which the least evolved beings
are said to fall and suffer the results of their actions
SUTRAI9 171
Sitra 1.9 Mera AeA a PST: |
Shabda-jiiananupati vastu-Shiinyo vikalpah
Shabda-: word
jfiana-: knowledge dependent only upon
anupati: following, a verbal conception
dependent upon
vastu-: real object } devoid of a real object
Shiinyah: devoid of
vikalpah: imaginary cognition
Dependent upon a verbal knowledge only but devoid of a real
object is the vytti called imaginary cognition (vikalpa).
Vyasa’s Commentary

That imaginary cognition arises neither in association with valid
proof nor in association with perversive cognition. A usage appears,
confined to an exaltation in the knowledge of words, even though
devoid of substance. For example: “Consciousness is the form and
nature of purusha.” When consciousness itself is purusha, what is
being designated by what? Normally there has to be an operative
relationship in a designation, e.g., “Chaitra’s cow.”

Similarly, the attributes of a substance being denied as belonging
to purusha, it (purusha) is inactive. Or, “Someone named Bana
stops (or will stop. or has stopped)”, here, upon the cessation of
movement, only the meaning of the verb is conveyed. Or, “Puru-
sha’s characteristic ts to be devoid of birth”; here merely the absence
ot the characteristic of being born is understood and not a par-
ticular attribute associated with purusha. Therefore (it is obvious
that) this characteristic is imagined (viAal/pita) and by that imagina-
tion a usage in practice prevails.

Paraphrase of Vyasa’s Commentary
}ihalpa neither arises from nor is in any way dependent on or
associated with pramdna or viparyaya. It 1s not grounded in either
of them. Because there exists a certain sense of exaltation about
172, SOTRAL9
the knowledge of words, people bring words into usage even when
there is no actual substance signified by the words, no actual object
designated by such a definition. For example, the statement
Consciousness (chaitanya) is the form and nature of purusha (the
spiritual self)
is meaningless or fallacious. When the actual position of our philos-
ophy is that consciousness itself is the spiritual self, what con-
sciousness, other than the very purusha, could be designated as the
nature of that purusha? Otherwise it is as though one were talking
of a cow belonging to a person named Chaitra, who as the owner
is other than his possession. Similarly, the sentence
The attributes of a substance being demied as belonging to puru-
sha, it (purusha) is inactive
is making no positive statement about any substance; only the
attributes of matter as pertaining to purusha are denied.

Similarly, the sentences “A person named Bana stops,” “A person
named Bana will stop,” and “A person named Bana has stopped”
are philosophically irrelevant because the true reality of a person is
the spiritual self (purusha) who neither moves in the confines of
space nor stops, nor is the concept of time applicable to him. Yet
the verb “stop” implies arrested motion, and when coupled with
varying tense configurations, also carries the notion of arrested
motion In time and space By definition, this is philosophical non-
sense since Bana’s true nature is pure consciousness, purusha, and
as such is without name or form and 1s quite unaffected by human
limitations of time, space and motion. In another example, the
content of the sentence

Purusha’s characteristic 1s to be devoid of birth
1s also insubstantial because to be devoid of something cannot be
a positive or a substantial characteristic. The sentence makes no
statement about any attributes of purusha. The usage of words in
this way ts expressive of imagination (vikalpa).
SOTRAIL9 173
Discussion

We have translated the compound phrase Shabda-jfidna-anupati
as “dependent upon a verbal knowledge only.” Explaining this in
somewhat greater detail, vikalpa is that modification (vrtti) of the
mind-field which follows

words, knowledge of words, and the knowledge produced by

words, and is productive of the same,
where no actual object or substance (vastu-Shiinyah) exists. The
question arises that if it is verbal knowledge (VM), why can it not
be included in @gama pramana, which in other systems of philos-
ophy is known as shabda pramana, or verbal proof? The answer is
that according to Vyasa on the preceding sitra, there has to be an
actual substance (arthah) that is corroborated by an dpta, to be
called dgama pramana. Vikalpa relates to no substance.

Then why not include it under perversive cognition (viparyaya)?
Because in viparyaya there is a substance which is at first wrongly
cognized but then when the error is refuted, is seen in its own true
nature. In vikalpa, however, there is no object at all.

A certain vrtti, imagination, arises, and a word expresses it. The
word also produces that very vrtti when used again by the same
speaker or by another. This particular vrtti 1s then bound to the
exalted power of verbal knowledge. So Vyasa says:

That imaginary cognition arises neither in association with a

valid proof nor in association with perversive cognition. A usage

appears. contined to an exaltation in the knowledge of words . .
The mind ts exalted by the fact that 1t knows words and uses them.
The word mdahdatniva, translated here as “exaltation,” may also
mean “glory” and “power ” Words have a power of their own to
convey the imagined meaning (VB) and therefore a certain usage
develops

The word viavahdra, translated as “usage,” also means “prac-
tical application” or “efficacy ” In viparyaya (VB) the object errone-
ously perceived has no practical application A seashell perceived
174. SUTRA I.9

as silver cannot be used by a silversmith to make silver earrings.
Also in viparyaya words do not express (VB) the actual object. An
observer says “silver” when first seeing a seashell, but the word
“silver” in this case does not convey the truth of the object. It
might safely be said that viparyaya is a cognition that does not
follow a verbal conception (Shabda-jfAdna-an-anupa@ti). In vikalpa
there is no refuting of an error, and the imagination expressed by
appropriate words still serves practical purposes, as we shall see
below. Even the most learned continue to make use of vikalpa in
practice. There is no succession of error and refutation, and one
word does not replace another; no “seashell” replaces “silver.” In
other words, vikalpa has a greater practical reality than has vipar-
yaya. For example (HA), consider the word “time,” which is not a
substance, but generates an imaginary idea, a vrtti, which produces
the vrtti—a concept of “time”—a word used consistently by the
most learned.

There are many different types of vikalpa which have not been
separately categorized by the commentators. Sometimes this imagi-
nation produces (VM) non-distinction among distinct objects, and
sometimes it produces distinction where there is no distinction,
and so forth. Sometimes the distinction of the qualification and
the qualified, where the two are actually one, is unreal. “Distinc-
tion” and “non-distinction,” not being substances, fall under the
category of vAalpa. The examples given by Vyasa are as follows:

“Consciousness 1s the form and nature of purusha ” When con-
sciousness itself is puruyha, what 1s being designated by what”?
Normally there has to be an operative relationship in a desig-
nation
The word “designation” (vyapadesha) has been translated as “predi-
cation” (RP) and as “the relationship of qualification with the
qualitied™ (BB) Both translations are equally accurate. But what 1s
being qualitied. designated by what, when consciousness is the
Same as the spiritual self’ When we say a person named Chaitra
has cows, the cows are something different from the owner, and
there 1s an operational, functional relationship between them. This
SOTRAI9 175
simply does not apply when we know consciousness and purusha
to bear a single identity. This is an example of vikalpa producing a
distinction where none exists and (VM, VB) when the conception
of a relationship of qualification with something qualified is artifi-
cial and imaginary. The use of the genitive case is not vikalpa in
the case of, say, “Devadatta’s blanket” (BR), but it is so in the case
of “purusha’s consciousness.” Again, Vyasa says:

Similarly, the attributes of a substance being denied as belonging

to purusha, it (purusha) is inactive.
Another rendering of the original would be as follows (VB):

pratishiddha-vastu-dharma: the attributes of a substance are

denied 1n the case of purusha;

nishkriyah purushah: purusha is inactive.
This latter rendering presents one with two examples of vikalpa.
The attributes that are normally ascribed to a substance are denied
in the case of purusha because this says nothing about purusha.
The Sanskrit adjectival compound pratishiddha-vastu-dharma which
1s supposed to be qualifying purusha is actually no qualification at
all Similarly, the adjective “inactive” (nishkriya), denying any pos-
sible activity in the case of purusha, expresses no qualification.
These are pseudo-adjectives, works of imagination (vikalpas) de-
pendent on words alone. Another rendering 1s based on a different
reading of the teat.

Pratwhiddha vastu-dharmadh the attributes of substances are

dented,

nohhkrivah purushah  puruyha 1s inactive
The first part here criticises the Buddhist view that “all attributes
(dharmas) are paintul, impermanent and devoid of a self ~ If there
are no attributes, how can any statement be made about them and,
especially, how can they be denied” It 1s all verbal activity (wsAa/pa).
The followers of the Buddhist and Nyaya schools accept negation
176 SUTRA I9
(a-bhava) as a proof or a category in their systems, but SAnkhya-
yoga denies it as a vikalpa.

Next Vyasa says:

“Someone named Bana stops (or will stop, or has stopped)”;

here, upon the cessation of movement, only the meaning of the
verb is conveyed.

Stopping (VM, VB) is a cessation of movement, an absence thereof.
A verb normally expresses an activity of some kind, but stopping
denotes an absence, a negation of the activity called movement.
This cessation of movement is further ascribed to Bana, who is
supposed to be the doer, an agent (kartr), performing this activity
called the cessation of activity as he “stops.” To confound by
compounding it further, an insubstantial concept like time—pre-
sent, future or perfect (or past)—is attached to it. So we say Bana
stops, will stop, has stopped. First there is an absence of move-
ment; then the verb “stop” is given a positive state (bhava); and
then that absent bhava, which is actually a negative (a-bha@va), is
attached to the idea of succession, an anterior or posterior incidence
expressed by a tense; this produces a triple vikalpa! But to go yet
deeper, the person Bana is merely a false identification of the
nameless, formless purusha who, not being subject to the space-
evolute of matter, does not move from place to place, so no ques-
tion of the cessation of movement arises. The fourth vikalpa! Not
being subject to space, it is not subject to time, time itself being a
vikalpa. Therefore, the present, future and past tenses do not apply.
“Bana stopped” is an example of a fivefold vikalpa!

“Purusha’s characteristic is to be devoid of birth” is the transla-
tion of Vyasa’s an-utpatti-dharma purushah. The first of these two
words is a compound adjectival phrase with the hteral meaning of
“one-with-the-characteristic-of-not-being-born.” Here also the same
argument applies as with the example given above, “purusha is
inactive ” The negative adjective is false. It has no substance and 1s
a mere verbal expression of the vrtti called vikalpa It 1s an absence,
imagined as though a positive state, then attached to purusha as
though his attribute—yet it expresses no attribute of purusha
Hence Vyasa says:
SOTRAI9 177
Here merely the absence of the characteristic of being born is
understood and not a particular attribute associated with purusha.
Therefore (it is obvious that) this characteristic is imagined (vikal-
pita), and by that imagination a usage in practice prevails.
The criticism of the examples of vikalpa given above is directed at
fallacious philosophical concepts which cannot be substantiated.
Some examples of the grossest form of vikalpa, the non-philosoph-
ical imagination, are (BG) brought together in the following verse:
There goes the son of a barren woman;
He has worn a crown of sky-flowers
After bathing in the waters of a mirage.
He carries a bow made of a hare’s horns.
178 SUTRA 1.10
SitraL10 swraneararat afattar
abhava-pratyayalambana vrttir nidra
abhava-: absence, negation
pratyaya-: cognition principle, cognition, causal principle
Glamband: resorting to, supported by, leaning on, dependent on,
having as a base

vritih: modification, mental state, operation, fluctuation, activity
nidra: sleep

Sleep is the modification or operation of the mind-field resort-

ing to the cognition principle of absence or negation and to the

cause thereof.
Vyasa’s Commentary

Sleep is to be considered a particular type of cognition because
one reflects about it. “I slept comfortably; my mind is clear; it
brightens up my discernment.” “I slept uncomfortably; my mind is
sluggish; 1t 1s wandering, unsteady; I am unable to concentrate.” “I
slept heavily and in a stupor; my mind is tired, indolent; it feels
stagnant and lost.”

This kind of reflection would not occur if there were no expe-
rience of cognition (during sleep), nor would there be memories
based on that sleep and relating to the subjects of these reflections.
Theretore sleep is a particular type of cognition. And for the pur-
pose of samadhi, this (vrtti called) sleep, too, should be brought
under control (irodha) just like other cognitions.

Discussion

In all stra texts there occurs a method known as implicit succes-
sion (anu-vriti), whereby the presence of a word that occurs in a
given sitra is implied also to function as part of a number of
subsequent siitras until no longer needed. An example of amu-vrtti
is the word vwrrt: that occurred in YS 1.5 and 1s understood in YS
16-9 For example, the full translation of YS [.9 is:
SOTRA 1.10 179
Dependent upon a verbal knowledge only but devoid of a real
object is the vrtti called imaginary cognition (vikalpa).
Even though the word vrtti does not occur in the siltra, it is brought
down from YS 1.5. Since the topic of the five vrttis continues until
YS L.11, the word vrtti would be implicit up to that siitra by the
rule of anu-vrtti.

Then why is the word vyiti repeated in the current siitra? The
answer is that this additional confirmation of sleep as a vrtti is
essential because one normally does not consider sleep to be a
modification, fluctuation, wave, operation or activity of the mind-
field. About the other four vrsttis there is no question, but even
experts (VM, NB) are doubtful about sleep being an operation of
the mind-field. The repetition of the word vrtti in the stra is for
the purpose of challenging and refuting the possible view (RY) that
sleep is an absence of awareness.

The compound phrase abhava-pratyaya-Glambana is to be ex-
plained as follows: Abhdva is absence of the vrttis that occur in
wakefulness and dream states (VM. VB, HA); that is, it is the
absence of all the other vrttis (BG, NB) enumerated in these siitras.
Absence means non-production or non-appearance (BG). The word
Pratyaya means cognition (pratiti) as well as the cause or origin; it
is that from which any cognition as an effect proceeds. The cogni-
tion that causes the absence of other vrttis (VM, VB, BR, NB, HA,
RY. RS) 1s the guna of prakrti called tamas. Tamas veils sattva,
the essential nature of buddhi (VB) and of the mind-field (VM).
When tamas becomes dominant (BR) and overpowers the sattva
and rajas of buddhi (VB, VM), veiling the chitta (NB), it covers all
the senses (VB, VM) However, this does not mean that the senses
are absent, as the Vedantins would have us believe (RS).

Then, because there are no other objects to reflect in the mind
to give the mind their form (VM, VB), the substance tamas (tamo-
dravvam), which is as real as any darkness (VB), overwhelms the
mind which, obscured with this defilement (alina) (VB), conse-
quently becomes impure. The mind then takes the form of this
Very tamas as its object (VM.VB, BG, NB, RY, SS) and identifies
180 SUTRA 1.10

with it (the experience and the vrtti arising therefrom) as it would
with external objects. Here the mind observes “I am sleeping” and
enjoys the tamasic pleasure that ensues. The sleeping person is
then called inwardly conscious (antah-safijfia) (VM, VB, NB). The
statement about the sleep state being inwardly conscious occurs
in verses 4 and 7 of the Mandikya Upanishad, where it is called
antah-prajfia. The subject of this Upanishad is the four states of
consciousness (wakefulness, dream, sleep and superconsciousness)
as inherent in the experience of the word OM or AUM. This
relates not to personal consciousness alone but also to the con-
sciousness of the cosmic Person, His wakefulness, dream, sleep
and superconsciousness, how these reflect in the states of individual
consciousness, and how the individual states may become the means
for understanding, experiencing and realizing the states of the cos-
mic Person. The 12 verses of the Mandiuikya Upanishad, 215 verses
of expository text by Gaudapada—who was the guru of the guru
of Shankaracharya—as well as Shankara’s own commentary on
the same are a very detailed and profound body of philosophy,
which cannot be treated here even succinctly. In addition, many
other texts like the Yoga-vasishtha provide us with further detailed
material. It is earnestly recommended that the reader gain access
to these sources of the great teachings concerning the nature of
cosmic as well as individual sleep in which the sleeping person is
termed inwardly conscious.

Before continuing, it is well to understand some facts about
sleep. It 1s obvious that sleep cannot be considered a state of uncon-
sciousness, for these reasons:

+ Only the surtace layer of mind, that 1s, the conscious mind, 1s

overcome by tamas

¢ Only that part of the mind sleeps which normally undergoes

alterations of wakefulness, dream and sleep The rest of the mind
continues its normal operations (which are enumerated in YS
Wl 15)

« [he entire mind never sleeps during one’s lifetime
It the entire mind were to sleep, who would continue operating the
lungs so one may breathe while asleep? Who would maintain the
SUTRA L10 181
heartbeat and keep the process of digestion going and keep the
blood circulating? Who would arrange for the mind to float in and
out of dreams? A person sleeps, wakes up feeling cold, covers up
with a blanket, falls asleep again, and remembers nothing of it in
the morning. Who tells the sleeping mind that the skin is feeling
cold? A person sleeps, rolls to the edge of the bed, but, unlike an
infant, does not fall off. Who tells the sleeper to roll away from the
edge and back to a safer part of the bed? If the entire mind slept,
having lost consciousness, who would answer, however slowly, to
the person’s name being called and wake up? If the entire mind
slept, who could awaken whom? One would never wake up; one
could not even remain alive.

It is obvious, then, that the part of the mind that experiences
vrttis is the very one that experiences tamas, the pall of mist or fog
which deactivates the senses temporarily and induces sleep. All the
commentators agree that during sleep (a) the mind identifies with
tamas, which replaces the objects of other vrttis, and (5) the mind
observes “I am sleeping” and experiences this absence and this
observation as a tamasic pleasure. This is what 1s meant by the
phrase abhava-pratyaya-Glamban4 ‘resorting to or being dependent
on the cognition of absence and to the cause thereof’. Vydsa’s
commentary reads:

Sleep is to be considered a particular type of cognition because
one reflects about tt.

In other words, (HA) sleep 1s that vrtt: of the mind in which
awareness Is very indistinct (a-sphusa). The object of this vrtti, like
the objects of our other experiences and their consequent vrttis, is
tamas with its dullness and stupefaction which causes the occlusion
or subjugation of normal cognitions that occur in wakefulness and
dream As darkness has the characteristic of indistinctness, causing
the features of all objects in it to become indistinct, as though
unitied. so also has sleep the quality of dullness and stupefaction
(ja.fata) that becomes the common feature of the body. the senses
and the mind-field (HA). If sleep were an absence of experience
182. SOTRA 1.10
(HA), one could not have recollections (BB) of it, because a recol-
lection implies memory or an imprint of an event or of an experi-
ence (HA, BR).

A logician might say that one recalls an absence. For example,
one might state, “There was no elephant in the hall.” Whether or
not this can be termed the memory of an absence of an elephant or
simply a conclusion drawn on the basis of the memory one had of
the actual experience of the positive conditions of the hall has been
a subject of intense and complex debates among logicians of many
schools. What is relevant to the point here is the fact that one does
not have the recollection of a vague absence of vrttis but reflects
about the quality of various types of sleep. This proves that sleep is
indeed a positive vrtti. It should be noted that neither Vydsa nor
the subsequent commentators have raised the possibility that the
quality of sleep is not a matter of recollection, but is inferred from
how one feels upon awakening. This question leads to the various
categories of sleep spoken of by the commentators. NTC, in fact,
discusses in considerable detail various philosophical views on the
nature of sleep, a full description of which would require a separate
treatise.

Even though sleep means that the mind is overcome by tamas, it
does not mean that the other two gunas (sattva and rajas) are
altogether absent. They are subservient to tamas in the experience
of sleep. Vyasa gives examples of the sattvic, rajasic and tamasic
sleep (VM. VB, RY). Vydsa’s commentary reads:

- one reflects about it “I slept comfortably; my mind 1s clear,
it brightens up my discernment.” “I slept uncomfortably, my
mind 1s sluggish, it is wandering, unsteady, | am unable to con-
centrate ~ “I slept heavily and in a stupor, my mind 1s tired,
indolent, it feels stagnant and lost (literally, as though stolen) ~
These three types of recollection or reflection indicate sattvic, ra-
jasic and tamasic sleep respectively. In the first example, the tamas
of sleep 1s aided by sattva: that 1s, even though sleep is primarily a
tamasic experience, sattva is serving as a minister (VM, VB) to
tamas the king. The person waking from such a sleep feels that the
SOTRA 110 183
mind is clear (prasanna). The word prasanna suggests the quality
of clear, still water and a pleasantness of mind that results from
such clarity. (VB) In such a clear mind, with a pleasant mood, the
intelligence functions with perfect discernment and is expanded
and made sharp to grasp subtle matter and detail.

(VM, VB) Rising from rajasic sleep one observes that the mind
is feeling a laziness (stydna). (This will be defined further in YS
1.30 among the nine obstacles in yoga.) The sleep in which tamas
has altogether overpowered sattva and rajas (VM) leaves one feeling
that the energy of the mind has been stolen (VB), as though plun-
dered by others. The mind loses its initiative and becomes disin-
clined to undertake action. As a result, one is unable to concentrate
and becomes ineffective.

We have already commented on Vydsa’s statement that

this kind of reflection would not occur if there were no experience

of cognition (during sleep), nor would there be memories based

on that sleep and relating to the subjects of these reflections.

Therefore sleep 1s a particular type of cognition.
This is understood. Now Vyasa says:

And for the purpose of samadhi, this (vrtt: called) sleep, too,

should be brought under control (mirodha) just hke other cog-

nitions (pratyayas)
The question might arise that since sleep (nidrd@) is a vrtti in which
the mind 1s concentrated (ekdagra) (see Sitra 1.1), why is it required
that one practise mirodha of other vrttis, such as pramdna, which
occur in the wakeful state? Is the eka@gra of sleep all that one
needs” In sleep the mind 1s concentrated on tamas and free from
paintul attractions to objects which a yogi should avoid (VB).
Why. then, should he practise the nirodha of sleep? Because even
though sleep appears like a concentration (VM), it is yet tamasic
Samadhi results from the conquest of the three gunas, the least
desirable of which 1s tamas. Sleep 1s, therefore, an adversary of
samadhi The purpose of samadhi is to raise one above the attri-
butes of the three gunas
184. SOTRA 1.10

sukha: pleasure (from sattva)

duhkha: pain (from rajas)

moha: somnolence and stupor (from tamas)
It has been seen that the three types of recollections about one’s
sleep indicate the presence of these three attributes, and it is there-
fore obvious that sleep is an adversary (VB) of samadhi and must
be brought under control. Furthermore, samadhi is not defined
merely (HA) as a state of mind (a) devoid of external awareness,
(b) under the power of stupor, (c) merely carrying on the functions
of the body, (d) without any remembrance of past experiences.
Rather, samadhi is total absorption in the object of meditation and
consequently is accompanied with restraint over activities of the
body and senses. Hence nirodha of sleep is as requisite as that of
the other vrttis insofar as the pursuit of samadhi is concerned.
SOTRA LI 185
Sitral11 aqwatawaracrare: cata:
anubhita-vishayasampramoshah smrtih

anu-bhiita-: experienced

vishaya-: objects of experience

a-sampramoshah: non-theft, not being stolen, not being lost

smrtik: memory
Objects experienced not being lost is the vytti called memory
(smrti).

Vyisa’s Commentary

Does the mind-field remember the cognition (pratyaya) or the
object of experience? A cognition is associated with and coloured
by the object of an apprehension and resembles and manifests (nir-
bhasa) the features of both the object apprehended and the process
and instrument of apprehension. Such cognition then produces an
imprint (sarhnskara) that is similar to them both.

That sarhskara then manifests its identity with its own manifes-
tative cause; it generates a memory. This memory is identical in
form to the same (sarmsk4ra, its manifested identity, and the mani-
festative cause). It consists of both the object apprehended and the
process and instrument of apprehension.

There, when the process and instrument of apprehension is the
primary feature, it is intelligence (buddhi) When the form of the
object of experience is primary, it becomes memory (smrti). This
memory 1s of two kinds: (a) where something imaginary is remem-
bered, and (5) where something not imaginary 1s remembered. Of
these, the former manifests in dream and the latter during wakeful-
ness All these memories arise from the experience of valid proof,
perversive cognition, imaginary cognition, sleep and memory.

Also, all these vrttis consist of pleasure, pain and stupefaction.
The pleasure, pain and stupefaction, however, are to be explained
under the afflictions (A/eshas). Attraction (rdga) 1s attendant upon
pleasure. Aversion (dvesha) 1s attendant upon pain. And ignorance
(avidyd) 1s stupetaction.
186 SOTRALII

All these vrttis are to be brought under control (nirodha). Upon
accomplishment of their nirodha, there ensues the samadhi of wis-
dom (samprajfiata) or even the acognitive (asamprajfiata) samadhi.

Discussion
The first part of the discussion will clarify the compound phrase
anubhita-vishaya-asampramoshah.
a-sampramoshah: from the verb root mush ‘to steal’; not being
stolen, non-theft, not being lost—of
vishaya: a subject, or an object, which
anu-bhiita: has been experienced.
The phrase can be explained in many differen# ways.

A non-theft pertains to (VM, BR, AD) a subject, or an object
experienced through valid proof, etc. Non-theft means (BR) the
arising of such a subject in the buddhi by way of sarnskaras. The
word vishaya means a subject or an object of experience, that is to
say, the subject of a memory as the object of a past experience.
This entire phrase should be substituted for “subject” or “object of
experience” in reading this discussion where the vishaya of a memory
is being discussed.

Only the experience based on pram, etc. (see Siitra 1.7) is the
father (RY) of memory. Only the subject of that experience is akin
to, or, as it were, “a kin to” the memory and can be included in the
process of memory. The term being translated here as “akin to” or
“a kin to” is @tmiva (WM, RY), which means “belonging to; related
to, like a relative or a kinsman; something to be included tn the
process as belonging to a particular realm.” A subject (VM) belongs
to the realm of the awareness (jana) born of a particular samskara
when it is projected forth from the experience that caused the
samskara tn the first place. Incorporating any more of a subject
than that 1s like a theft (VM, NB) Where such a theft does not
occur and no more than the object of the experience is grasped as
the subject (NB), such a vrtti 1s called memory Memory must be
limited to that subject which has been absorbed by the chitta and
not stealing, as 1t were, another’s possession (HA). It could be less
SOTRA L11 187
than that subject, due to failure of recall, but never more (VM,
NB). This “another’s possession” includes even the original object
that was experienced (RY). It is not the subject of memory for the
purposes of the siitra. The siitra does not mean to include a recog-
nition, which requires an external object being experienced afresh
with the senses even though they are also serving as an aid to the
past impression. Memory, as a technical term here, is entirely an
internal mental process produced from the sarnskaras (VB). The
intent of Vyasa appears to be that the subject of memory is the
vrtti that was experienced together with the substance (artha) of
that vrtti, but not the external object (VB, BG, NB).
Vyasa’s commentary reads:

Does the mind-field remember the cognition (pratsava) or the

object of experience”
In a memory, does the mind remember the fact of a cognition (the
consciousness of a perception) (VM, NB), like “I know the vessel”
(HA), or does it remember the form of the object? Is it the ex-
perience that is remembered (VM) or the object of the experience?
Vyasa’s answer 1s:

A cognition ts associated with and coloured by the object of an

apprehension and resembles and manifests the features of both

the object apprehended and the process and instrument of appre-

hension Such cognition then produces an imprint (samskara)

that is similar to them both
The Sanskrit phrases here should be examined with care

pratvavah a cognition

erdhva-uparuktah (is) associated with and coloured by the object

ofan apprehension

U pa-rafiy means “to be coloured by something because of its prox-
imity ~ A cognition is coloured and its nature determined by the
proximity of the object that is being experienced, apprehended
Theretore a cognition carries the features or natures (vipa) of the
188 SOTRALI1

object as well as the process or the fact of that apprehension. It
contains both the grahya, the object of experience, and the grahana,
the instrument, the process and the fact of experience. “It resembles
the features and natures of both of these and manifests them”—
this entire idea is expressed by the word nir-bhasa ‘shining forth
as’.

The cognition then leaves a sarnskara in which both features are
included: (1) the fact that the person cognizes the object, has gained
experience thereof; and (2) the object as it actually is. Smrti does
not arise by itself. An experience first becomes a samskara, an
imprint, in the @Shaya (which is to be explained). From the sarnskara
it rises again as a mental operation (vrtti). This process of the
rising of vrttis through the sarhskara of a past experience is memory
(smrti) (AD). The object itself therefore ceases to be present, but
the sarnskara produces the memory. So Vyasa states:

That sarhskadra then manifests its identity with its own manifes-
tative cause; it generates a memory. This memory is identical in
form to the same (samskdra, its manifested identity, and the
manifestative cause). It consists of both the object apprehended
and the process and instrument of apprehension.
We have translated the phrase sva-vyafijaka-afijanah as “manifests
its identity with 1ts own manifestative cause.” Concerning the way
the samskara was formed, the cause of its manifestation was the
original cognition. So when it re-produces the experience in the
form of memory, the memory also 1s identical to (a) the sarnskara,
as it manifests, shows itself to be identical with, the original ex-
perience, and (4) the experience itself that was the manifestative
cause of the samskara (although the memory has now been trig-
gered by (VB) some other manifestative cause, such as an appro-
priate time)

The memory, then, just like the original cognition, and the sarh-
skara it had formed, consists of both the object apprehended, and
the process and fact of apprehension. This 1s the chain of causation
here:
SUTRA LIL 189
(a) the experience, from which 1s produced
(b) the sarhskara, which generates
(c) the memory,
each with the twofold process: (1) cognition that “I know the
object,” and (2) cognition of the nature of the object itself.

This is a synopsis of what the commentators have said about
Vydsa’s paragraph. Obviously, unless the mind knows that it knows,
it cannot re-produce as memory the experience of the original
object. In this process the faculty of discrimination (buddhi) plays
its part. Vyasa says:

There, when the process and instrument of apprehension is the

primary feature, it is intelligence (buddhi).
A more literal translation of the text would be:

When the feature of the process of apprehension 1s primary, it is

intelligence.
But the first rendering is preferred as being better English. The
word “intelligence” (buddhi) 1s not used here in the sense of the
entire buddhi faculty but rather one of its functions, the process of
apprehension. Once again, let us clarify “I know the vessel.” This is
an apprehension, an act of intelligence. This particular type of
apprehension 1s called amu-vyvavasdya, the awareness that buddhi
has that it cognizes or apprehends or experiences. It 1s an important
part of the process of memory, in which the other part of the
cognition is the object (in this case, the vessel). However, when one
sees the vessel a second time and says. “This is that vessel.” this 1s
not technically included under memory for the purpose of this
sitra [tis called “re-cognition”™ (pratvabhifid). In the apprehension
“Ehnow the vessel.” one vrtti- -“the vessel” -1s the subject (vishaya)
of the other vrttr “I know ” Knowing here is the primary feature.
Then, says Vyasa

When the torm of the object of experience 1s the primary feature,

it becomes memory
190 SOTRAII11

Even though the anu-vyavasdya is an important part of the process
of memory, the memory proper is a single vrtti—“the vessel.” Here
the awareness, “I know,” is secondary.

Vyasa says:

This memory is of two kinds: (a) where something imaginary is
remembered, and (5) where something not imaginary is remem-
bered. Of these, the former manifests in dream and the latter
during wakefulness.
In fact what appears in the dream is not memory proper because
the entire scene of space, time and relationships is warped. A
person familiar in one setting may be seen associated with a com-
pletely different setting, which is imaginary, of which there has
been no former experience and, therefore, from which no memory
could evolve. For this reason many commentators (VM, NB, RY)
place the dream under memory only because (VM) it appears to be
like a memory; however, strictly speaking, dreams fall under the
category of viparyaya (YS 1.8), having no substance (VM).

It may be safely said that some constituents of a dream are
certainly pure memory, while the rest are imagination. VB is of the
opinion that Vyasa meant to include here only those parts that are
true memory. This view is supported by Vydsa because of the
locative case “in dream,” which obviously does not mean that the
dream is entirely imagination. Nor does Vyasa himself equate the
dream with imagination (viparyaya), although it must be agreed
that those parts of the dream which are not pure memory do fall
under the definition of wiparyvayva ( YS 1.8):

False Knowledge without a basis in the nature or form of the
respective object 1s the vrtti called perversive cognition (viparvaya)
In the list of tive vrttis (¥S 1.5-11), memory has been placed last
(VM, VB) because in Vyasa’s words:
All these memories arise from the experience of valid proof,
perversive cognition, imaginary Cognition, sleep and memory.
SOTRA i1t 191

“The experience” means the buddhi’s first (VM) cognition of or

involvement with the object (VM); thereafter it becomes (VB) the

awareness of the apprehension that buddhi has (anu-vyavasdya), as
explained above. It is also clear from Vydsa’s passage that a memory
may be remembered, as the first-time experience of that memory.

Thus there may occur the memory of a memory.

Of the five vrttis (BR), pramana, viparyaya and vikalpa occur in
the wakeful state. The experience of these three combined, mas-
querading as direct perception (pratyaksha), becomes the dream.
Sleep is a unique state in that it is marked by the absence of other
vrttis even though it is in itself a vrtti. Memory is the effect of any
or all of these vrttis.

Buddhi is the raw material from which these vrttis are shaped,
as images are shaped from gold (VB). These vrttis are the mutations
(parinamas) of buddhi. Because buddhi is made of prakrti, which
consists of the three gunas, Vyasa says:

Also, all these vrttis consist of pleasure, pain and stupefaction.
The pleasure, pain and stupefaction, however, are to be explained
under the afflictions (k/eshas).

However, for the sake of brevity here, he quotes YS II.7-8:
Attraction is attendant upon pleasure Aversion is attendant upon
pain

As to stupefaction, he says:

And ignorance (avidvd) 1s stupefaction

This will be defined further in YS 11.5.

Although the desirability of avoiding stupefaction and pain ts
obvious, a question arises as to why the pleasure of the vrttis
should also be avoided. The traditional reply is that nowhere does
pleasure exist in the vrttis as pure and unalloyed, free from pain
and stupefaction. It is, in fact, pleasures and attractions (rdgas)
that are the direct causes of aversions.
192, SOTRALII
As to moha (stupefaction, somnolence, delusion), it is of three
kinds (HA):
|. vichara-moha: confusion of thought processes
2. chesh{a-moha: confusion in the physical posture, gait, move-
ment, effort, as though one’s limbs are not being moved under
one’s own observation or by one’s own clarity of will
3. vedand-moha: confusion of feelings and emotions where one
does not know even what is painful or pleasant to him
It is such confusion that produces all pain and grief. For this
reason, says Vyasa:
All these vrttis are to be brought under control (nirodha). Upon
accomplishment of their nirodha, there ensues the samadhi of
wisdom (samprajfidta) or even the acognitive (asamprajfata)
samadhi.
SOTRA 1Li2 193
Sitral.12  svareaeeraread afaeter:s
abhyisa-vairagyabhyam tan-nirodhah
abhydsa-: (with) practice and
vairagyabhyam: with dispassion
tat-: of those
nirodhah: control (occurs)
The control of those vrttis occurs through practice and dispassion.
Vyasa’s Commentary

Now, what is the method for establishing control over these
(vrttis)?

[Satra:] The control of those vrttis occurs through practice and

dispassion.
The river of the mind-field indeed flows both ways. It flows towards
beatitude (BB) and it flows towards evil (BB). The part sloping
down the domain of discernment (viveka) towards the reservoir of
isolation (Kaivalya) flows towards beatitude. The one sloping down
the domain of indiscrimination (a-viveka) towards the reservoir of
worldly transmigrations flows towards evil.

There, the stream of worldly attractions is blocked, reduced,
through dispassion (vairdgva). The stream of discriminative wisdom
(viveka) 1s opened up through the practice (abhyasa) of realizing
(darshana) discernment (viveka).

Thus the nirodha of the vrttis of the mind-field is dependent
upon both (abhyasa and vairdgya)

Discussion

The mind-field 1s like a river (HA) As some rivers (VB)!3 flow
towards the ocean and some simply become lost into the ground,
so the mind flows both ways. Vyasa expresses it as follows:

17 NBosavy “As the river sometimes flows towards the ocean and sometimes towards the
ground or else it might yust dry up “ His explanation of the metaphor 1s not clear
194 SOTRAI12

The river of the mind-field indeed flows both ways. It flows

towards beatitude and it flows towards evil. The part sloping

down the domain of discernment (viveka) towards the reservoir

of isolation (kaivalya) flows towards beatitude. The part sloping

down the domain of indiscrimination (a-viveka) towards the re-

servoir of worldly transmigrations flows towards evil.
The phrases

kaivalya-prag-bhara: towards the reservoir of isolation

and
sarmsGra-prag-bhara: towards the reservoir of worldly transmi-
grations

present some difficulty in translation. Prag-bhdara is a dam or dyke
(prabandha). \ts yaugika, derivative meaning (see p. 18), could also
be “bearing a weight or load tipping in favour of (as on a scale);
carrying a momentum towards; predisposed towards.” So the com-
plete translation would be: “It is predisposed towards, carrying a
moment towards, bearing its weight towards isolation (kaivalya)
so its flow creates a reservoir at the dam of kaivalya, and simi-
jarly ... at the dam of samsara.” The word vishaya is a double-
entendre. It means “a domain; a subject and/or an object of expe-
rience.” The river of mind flows in the domain of discernment
(viveka) when the subject it 1s occupied with and the object of its
experience is that viveka. The same applies in the case of non-
discernment, indiscrimination (a-viveka). The mind-river 1s inclined
(BB) down the slope of its domain (vishaya), subject or object—
whether it be discrimination or indiscrimination.

Samsara is the antonym of kaivalya, nirvana, or moksha. The
word expresses involvement with the world that leads one to gather
karma so that one remains entangled in the continuous moving
wheel of the world through the cycles of creation and dissolution
and many transmigrations through birth and death.

When the mind-river is inclined towards kaivalya, it leads to
Aalyana, all that is beautiful, benevolent, propitious and desirable,
to the noble way, the way of beatitude (BB), in short, to liberation
SOTRA 1.12 195
(moksha) (VB). Otherwise it leads one towards the evil way and
the evil result (papa).

Pertaining to practice and dispassion (abhydsa and vairagya)
Vyasa says:

The stream of worldly attractions is blocked, reduced, through
dispassion (vairdgyva). The stream of discriminative wisdom (viveka)
is opened up through the practice (abhyésa) of realizing (darshana)
discernment (viveka).

Thus far the definition of yoga has been given, and Siitras 5-11!
were an exposition on the word vrtti that occurred in the definition,
the /akshana-siitra 1.2. Now the means thereto, the method thereof
(VB), are to be explained.

The practitioner is being advised to choose not just one (VM,
VB, RS) of the two methods, either practice (abhydsa) or dispassion
(vairagya), but the two together. Each of the two fulfils an essential
part of the purpose (VM, VB, RS, BG). This is very clear from
Vyasa’s words:

Thus the nirodha of the vrttis of the mind-field is dependent
upon both (abhydsa and vairaégya)

Ordinarily (RY) the average person’s mind-stream flows in the
domain and down the slope of worldly interest towards the ocean
of samsdara. One breaks the momentum of that flow through dispas-
sion and turns the stream upwards through practice (abhydsa) of
the discrimination between purusha and the sattva of the mind.

The stream of the mind-field flowing towards the worldly in-
volvements is turned off (SS), reduced (VB. HA). blocked (RS,
BG. NB), its flow stemmed (RY), stopped (HA), through dispassion
(\airdg\a) Dispassion arises as one sees (BR, NB) the evil of worldly
ways and interests, and consequently the mind's inclination is turned
ott trom them (BR)

Practice 1s cultivating and nurturing wiveka, a view of life, of
reality and of oneself and one’s attitudes and works in the light of
the philosophy and experience of discernment or discriminating
196 SOTRA 1.12

wisdom (VB, BG, NB, HA). This view is referred to as darshana,
the common Indian word for philosophy. Frequently repeated
observance of the means and methods of attaining viveka (HA), as
well as practice of meditation all the way up to samadhi (SS), is to
be included in this practice of the view of discernment (abhydsa of
the darshana of viveka).

Through abhyasa the stream of those vrttis is unblocked, opened
up and made increasingly stronger, leading to viveka, so that the
stream may enter the ocean of nirodha (VB). In other words, it is
through practice that the stream of viveka is opened up, releasing
its flow (HA, NTC). Thus the turbulence of the mind is calmed so
that it may flow pacifically (SS). The experience shows the mind
that the way of peacefulness leads to comfort (BR). The result is a
firmness and strength in one’s practice as well as in one’s dispassion.

NTC has described this process as follows: A flooded river causes
havoc and at the same time provides a service. On one hand it
devastates villages and towns; on the other hand it irrigates the
fields. The devastation is prevented by building dams and so forth,
and the irrigation is controlled and directed by digging canals and
the like. Similar is the case of the river of the mind-field (chitta-
nadi). Its flow upon the ground of objects towards the ocean of
transmigratory cycles into the world (samsdara) is broken through
dispassion (vairagya). And its flow on the ground of spirituality
towards the ocean of the joy of liberation increases through practice
(abhydsa) by bringing into control the obstacles like sleep.

The mind-field has two natures (RY). agitation as well as sub-
mersion (/aya) If one has disinterest 1n the world (vairagya) but no
practice of discernment or of meditation, the mind’s agitations will
be pacified but the mind will enter into sleep. The yoga of samadhi
will not be fulfilled. It is a well-known fact in the oral and experien-
ual tradition that many people who have not prepared themselves
by practice fall asleep during mental exercises while in the corpse
posture (Shavdsana) Some also fall asleep during meditation or
when in the presence of a master’s mental and pranic energy. Only
with gradual practice are they able to absorb and assimilate the
energy of prana, kundalini and consciousness into themselves so
SUTRA 112 197
that their meditations may be elevated to greater heights.
Therefore it is to be concluded that both abhyasa and vairdgya
are prerequisite for attaining nirodha. Hence (VB) we read:
No doubt, O mighty-armed Arjuna, the mind is fickle and diffi-
cult to restrain, but, O Son of Kunti, it is brought under control
through practice (abhyasa) and through dispassion (vairagya).
Bhagavaa-gita V1.35
Even though nirodha was defined in YS 1.2, the word occurs again
in this siitra as the stated goal. Practice and dispassion bring about
the nirodha of the vrttis (BR), whose normal nature, based in the
gunas, is prakasha, illumination; pra-vrtti, involvement, initiative,
adventurousness; and niyama, stability, restraint, control. When
(BR, NB) their predisposition to flow outwards has been stemmed
and they are turned inwards, the vrttis submerge into their origi-
nating cause, the mind-field. Then they dwell within their origin,
chitta, as Shakti, power, energy, potentia. This having occurred,
the river of the mind also merges into nirodha, which is the same
(NB) as kaivalya (isolation).
198 SUTRA 1.13
Sitral13 aw feared aetseara:
tatra sthitau yatno’bhyasah
tatra: there, between those (two, practice and dispassion)
sthitau: in the matter of, towards, settling, stabilising, coming to
rest (of the mind-field); as regards stilling, steadiness
yatnah: endeavour, effort
abhydsah: practice

Between those two, practice and dispassion, the endeavour

towards stillness and stability (sthiti) of the mind-field is called

practice.
Vyasa’s Commentary

Stillness or stability (sthiti) means the mind-field flowing pacif-
ically when it is without vrttis.

The endeavour tending towards this purpose is virility or ex-
ertion.

Practice is the observance of the means thereto, with the will to
achieve its fulfilment.

Discussion

The definition of practice is given (VB) by way of stating its
nature and purpose. That 1s, the endeavour with regard to, for the
purpose of, stilling the mind is called practice.

It may be asked (SS): One has to make the effort of a mental
activity when practising the repetition of mantra for japa and so
forth, but what could be the endeavour involved in stillness? Al-
though Vyasa says that

stillness or stability (sthitt) means the mind-field flowing pacif-
ically when it is without vrtts,
it does not mean a total absence of vrttis (VM, VB). As we shall
see under YS 142, (VB) one does not begin even samprajfidta
samadhi until after this stillness (sthit1) is experienced. This sthiti—
SOTRA 1.13 199
“stillness, stability, settling down, coming to rest, steadiness”—
means either that the mind-field is free of any vrtti other than that
which is the object of concentration (VB), or that it is free of the
rajasic and tamasic vrttis (VM, NB, RY), and sattvic vrttis alone
(NB, RS) remain. Stillness is the one-pointedness of the mind-field
when it is without the rajasic and tamasic vrttis (RY).

Other commentators are more ambitious. According to them
(BR, AD), that mutation (parindma) of the mind, when it is with-
out vrttis and dwelling in its own nature, is to be called sthiti. How-
ever, VB is correct in stating that this definition would raise sthiti
beyond the experience of samprajfiata samadhi; the path would
then come after the goal, the endeavour would supersede its own
purpose. The intent of the siitra seems to be to state implicitly that
the endeavour in meditation means bringing the mind to stillness
or stability, which means freedom from the rajasic and tamasic
turbulences, the mind’s one-pointed concentration on a single satt-
vic vrtti remaining uninterrupted so that the mind flows in a calm,
pacific, smooth stream. The mind then flows calmly because it is
not interrupted by other vrttis (VB) and not disturbed by emotional
waves of exhilaration, grief and so forth. The word Shanta ‘pacific,
calm’ used by Vy4sa is explained (VB):

One who upon hearing, touching, seeing, tasting or smelling what-
ever pleasant or unpleasant 1s neither pleased nor displeased 1s
called pacific. calm (Shanta).
Mahopanishad |V.32
The endeavour ts directed towards sthiti, and 1s explained by Vyasa
by offering two synonyms:
\irta virility, vigour, strength, energy, potency, the qualities of
a hero
utyaha enthusiasm. perseverance, fortitude, firmness, exertion,
Vigourous Pursuit
Obviously an endeavour should be undertaken with these heroic
qualities turned inwards and their intense concentration directed at
the effort to bring the mind to stillness. One says to oneself again
200 SUTRA 1.13
and again: “Even though the mind naturally flows outwards, I
shall definitely bring it under control” (SS).

On this sitra NTC says stability (sthiti) means one-pointedness
(ekagrata) upon the transcendental self (para-Atman) whose nature
is essence (sat) and consciousness (chit). The effort (prayatna)
means:

utsaha: zeal and enthusiasm that “I shall certainly restrain the
mind which constantly flows outwards.”
sa@hasa: courage, that is, embarking upon the endeavour without
considering “It can be done,” “It can’t be done,” etc.
dhairya: steadfastness and patience that “If not in this life then
in some future one this will definitely succeed.” It should be
such that one is willing to try to empty the ocean by catching
its drops on the end of a blade of grass!
adhyatma-vidya: pursuit of spiritual science. It means that the
mind-field (chitta) 1s extinguished like fire when it 1s provided
no more fuel. It occurs when one sees the purposelessness and
falsity of objects and a true purpose in 4tman.
mahat-seva. service of the great, which consists of prostrating
before them, asking them questions and serving their person.
In addition, amas, etc. will be explained in subsequent sitras.
Returning to Vyasa:
Practice 1s the observance of the means thereto ...
The means towards this stillness are (VM) the eight limbs (angas)
of yoga (YS 11 29ff.) and others such as (VB, BG) faith, etc. (YS
1 20) This state of stillness is further strengthened by following the
methods taught in YS 1 35-39 This observance of the method, says
Vyasa, is undertaken
with the will to achieve its fulfilment
This phrase 1s a translation of the single word sam-pipadavishayd,
the instrumental case of the desiderative nominal form sam-pidda-
dayisha, which implies a desire, an intent, a will. Without a definite
SOTRALI3 201
resolve and the exertion of will, one will not fulfil one’s purpose,
and the effort will not bear fruit. To reverse Vydsa's sequence:

«A will and intent to fulfil the purpose is required
so one may undertake

« the observance of the means and methods of yoga

¢ with heroic perseverance, vigour, power and virility,
so that

+ the mind may become one-pointed on a sattvic vrtti,
alone, and

« flow ina calm, pacific, unturbulent, smooth stream.

Another possible translation of the siitra is: “The effort to remain
there is practice.” It is a common experience that whatever depth
of meditation one reaches remains a temporary experience at first.
No sooner does one reach it during a meditation session than he
or she slips down, and during the activity of daily life meditative
depth remains elusive. Only by continuous application of will and
constancy of practice does it become possible for one to learn to
“remain there” at first during the meditation, and later to maintain
that depth in daily life. This is further discussed in the next siitra.
202 SUTRA I14
Sitral14 4 dtdarareantacercrataet geqta: |
sa tu dirgha-kala-nairantar ya-satkarasevito
dydha-bhimih
sah: that (practice)
tu: however
dirgha-kdla-: (for) a long time
nairantarya-: without interval, without interruption
satkdra-: respect, positive attitude, reverence, adoration, devotion
G-sevitah: pursued, thoroughly served, maintained in assiduous
and complete observance
ardha-bhimih: (becomes) firm of ground
That practice, however, becomes firm of ground only when pur-
sued and maintained in assiduous and complete observance for
a long time, without interruption and with a positive and devout
attitude.
Vyasa’s Commentary
Assiduously undertaken for a long time (a-sevitah), assiduously
undertaken without interruption, cultivated with ascetic observance
(tapas), celibacy (brahmacharya), knowledge (vidya) and devotion
(Shraddha) and thus with a positive and devout attitude, it becomes
firm of ground. That is to say, it is then not suddenly overpowered
by a worldly, non-meditative (vyurthdna) sarnskara.
Discussion
The firmness of practice is being advised (BG). The question
arises that since the vyurth@na-samskaras, samskaras of worldly
involvements, have accumulated much strength in people from
beginningless time (VM, VB, NB, SS), as have the impressions of
rajasic and tamasic vrttis (RY), how is 1t possible that a commonly
infirm and weak practice, undertaken relatively recently (SS), will
overpower the force of these samskaras (VM, VB, NB, RY) which
await to waylay one (VM) and by which the practice 1s often
blocked (WM, VB) and constricted (RY)? The answer 1s as follows.
SUTRA 1.14 203
The practice needs the three qualifications (VM) stated. It must
be observed (a) for a long time, (5) without interruption, (c) with
due respect, adoration, devotion and positive feeling. In other
words, the practice must be consistent, frequent, repeated—for a
long time, every day, without interruption and with a positive
feeling. Yoga should be practised every day and every moment
(HA). If one practises for some time and then allows an interrup-
tion, it permits an accumulation of opposite vrttis again, which
then overpower the meagre yoga-samskaras which had been gathered
(VB, SS). To practise for a few days or months and to expect
accomplishment is like a parent’s saying “There are only four Vedas.
My son went to study them five days ago and hasn't returned yet!”
(SS). In this regard (SS) one may quote:
Reaching accomplishment after many hfe spans, one then arrives
at the transcendental state.
Bhagavad-gitd V1.45
Therefore one should be prepared to practise for years and lifetimes.
As for a positive attitude: without it there will arise at the time
of meditation or during meditation the problems of (SS) sleep,
distraction, and the smearing of mind with the worldly dirt of
attractions. A positive attitude of adoration and reverence for the
path must be constantly affirmed. (This will be further discussed
under Sitra 1.30, which speaks of the impediments in the way of
attaining firm ground.) A positive attitude exhibits itself in very
substantial ways
tupas ascetic practice, austerity, reducing one’s material and
physical pleasures and luxuries and the body’s dependence on
objects (to be discussed under }'S I 1,32)
hrahmacharya celibacy, maintaining control over sexual pas-
sion (to be discussed under YS I] 30)
vidid knowledge, proficiency (a) in the tradition, (5) in the
texts, and, more importantly, (c) in the systematic method of
Practice
204 SUTRA 1.14
Shraddha: faith and devotion that “Samadhi is the only worthy
goal, the path I am on is the correct one, the lineage of my
gurus is authentic, J shall certainly reach samadhi, and I re-
vere, honour, adore, have faith in my goal, my path, my
gurus, and myself.” This faith shows itself in the way of (a)
service given to the gurus, (b) humility towards all, (c) con-
stant examining and curbing of one’s ego, and (d) attitudes
and acts expressive of devotion.
If one does not practise for a long time, or if one breaks off one’s
practice many times over an extended period, it shows the absence
of sufficient faith and devotion; as a result, distractions (vikshepas),
despoiling emotions (kashdyas), inclinations to pleasure, etc. are
not countered (NTC). When the practice becomes firm of ground,
one cannot be moved from it even by the strongest adversity or
pain (SS), nor can one be distracted from it by the subtlest pleasure
or the most powerful attraction, nor, as Vyasa says, can it be
suddenly overpowered by a vyuttha@na-sarnskara.

When a certain level of practice 1s thus firm of ground, one
recognizes the greatest depth of experience it is capable of imparting.
Then

one can go to that depth in an instant at any time
under any condition or situation, and gradually
that becomes the natural plateau of awareness
in which one remains at all times
From here one attempts to gain yet higher ground by the same
rules of this sitra which have brought one this far.
SOTRA 115 205
Sitral15 gqeerquiaataqataqeres aeitercaanr
raz
drshtanuShravika-vishaya-vitrshnasya vaShikara-
safijfia vairagyam
drshta-: seen, perceived with physical senses
@nushravika-: heard of ina tradition or scripture
vishaya-: subjects, matters, objects of enjoyment or experience
vurshnasya: of one who has lost craving for
vashikara-: mastery, bringing under total control
safjria: term, definition, name
vairdgyam: dispassion
The mastery established by someone who has lost all craving for
the matters of experience or enjoyment, whether perceived with
physical senses or heard of in the tradition and scriptures (as of
the subtle worlds), is called dispassion.
Vyasa’s Commentary
When one has lost the craving for matters perceptible, such as
women [1.e., the opposite sex], food, drink, power and affluence
(aishvarva), as well as when one has lost the craving in matters
that are heard of in traditions and scriptures, such as the attain-
ment of heaven or of the states of videha and prakrti-laya (YS
119), then the mind,
Seeing the tault or the blemish that accrues in involvement,
Its State,
devoid of a concept of rejectables or acceptables even in the
Presence of celestial and non-celestial objects and comprising a
disinterest in enjoyments, which occurs through the power of
pra-sankhy dna (the realization of the difference between matter
and the spiritual self),
is termed vashikdra, mastery and control, that 1s, dispassion (va-
rdzia)
206 SOTRALIS
Discussion

The verb root rafij ‘to colour’, from which is derived the word
vairdgya, was discussed earlier (p. 152) and should be reviewed
before proceeding with this reading.

Vairdgya means “the state of being devoid of, free from, raga,
the attraction that accrues, as it were, from the objects of attraction
reflecting in and colouring the mind.” Even though this is the
expanded, derivative meaning of the word, it is not a complete
definition of vairdgya for the purpose of yoga.

(VB) Simply the absence of this colouring process will not suffice,
nor will even the freedom from attractions that is gained from
seeing their faults; such a simple vairdgya is not conducive to the
goal that is nirodha. Mere disinterest in certain objects of expe-
rience and enjoyment is of no value for this purpose, as for ex-
ample a disinterest in objects in the case of an illness. We also see
that often an attraction towards objects remains even after intelli-
gence becomes aware of their attendant faults. Therefore, the defi-
nition of vairagya here is not merely turning away from a craving,
becoming indifferent (vi-trshna), but rather total mastery and con-
trol (vashika@ra). NTC says that control (vashik@ra) is an essential
part of dispassion. If this were not so one might mistakenly think
he had attained vairdgya when he had only not found the objects
of his desire or lacked the capacity to enjoy them.

The first step is to overcome the craving for the objects of this
world which are perceived with the senses, such as the enjoyment
of the opposite sex, food and drink; also to be overcome are
affluence, success, luxury, power—all of which are expressed by
the word aishvarva. Although this word was discussed earlier (p.
101), here it is not used in the same sense of achieving spiritual
lordship, but rather of achieving worldly success. It may also be
said that even though spiritually attained lordship 1s naturally at-
tendant upon a person of sattvic buddhi, the ambitious attraction
towards it, which is not sattvic, 1s to be avoided.

The word “women” from Vyasa’s commentary is being para-
phrased here as “the opposite sex,” out of consideration for con-
temporary concerns. These texts were composed and taught in
SOTRA E15 207
monasteries by yoga masters for whose male disciples the attraction
of women must have been a common problem. Although there
have been many great women yogis (yoginis) known to the tradition,
it is thought that men are not as strong an attraction to aspiring
women as women are to aspiring men. This is the only explanation
that can be offered at this point; and wherever such allusions
appear, they will be translated as “the opposite sex.”

The perceptible objects of attraction may be conscious, such as
persons of the opposite sex, or unconscious, such as food, drink,
garments, etc. (VM, RS), or attractive sounds and so forth (BR).
Then there are also imperceptible attractions, of which we hear
only in spiritual traditions. These are experiences such as paradise
or heaven, the subtle worlds of the shining ones, or devas, the
energy realms, the so-called astral planes, the sounds of angelic
music and so forth. Often human beings are taught to turn their
minds from worldly objects so they may reap these heavenly expe-
riences and such as rewards. In the yoga tradition a promise of
these other-worldly enjoyments of subtle matter with the aid of a
subtler mind may occasionally be used to draw a disciple’s attention
away from grosser worldly objects of material forms perceptible
with the senses. However, as soon as this purpose has been accom-
plished, the spiritual teacher works towards turning the disciple’s
mind away from these subtle pleasures also. (The classic example
of this approach 1s the epic by the poet AShvaghhosha of the first
century AD narrating the stratagems of this nature used by the
Buddha to liberate his cousin, Nanda.)

The chief attractions of the subtle nature enumerated by the
commentators are (NB) the eight siddhis (discussed on YS III.45),
heaven, and the states of wideha and prakrti-lava. The last two
deserve some attention here, although they will be discussed in
greater detail under Sitra 1.19

The word videha means “bodiless.” The yogis who, after aban-
doning the physical body, continue to maintain the body consti-
tuted of mahat, ahamk4ra and mind are called widehas (VM, RS).
Others say that the wdehas maintain the /inga body (VB), which
by the definition of the word /inga given in Sitra 11.19 would be
208 SOTRA IIS
considered constituted of the mahat evolute alone, the first evolute
of prakrti.

Concerning the prakrti-layas, the word means “those who are
absorbed in prakrti,” which is unmanifest matter, an equilibrium
of sattva, rajas and tamas. This is the state of matter before crea-
tion, that is, before the equilibrium of the three gunas is disturbed
to produce even the subtlest evolute. Only a minute portion of
prakrti is at any time passing through the mutation of forms that
constitute the universe and its phenomena. The prakrti-layas are
those yogis, those spiritual selves

ewho have risen beyond all attractions of the mutative phenomena

ewho have dissolved—unlike the videhas—even the manas, ahath-

kara and mahat (or buddhi) into the equilibrium of unmanifest
prakyti

-but who have not yet reached kaivalya. They use the unmanifest,

non-phenomenal matter beyond the universe as their playground.

(VB) The videhas enjoy still the sullied form of prakrti, whereas
the prakrti-layas have mastery over pure prakrti. As ordinary be-
ings in bondage identify with the body, and videhas identify with
the mind, aharmkara and mahat (buddhi), so the prakrti-layas iden-
tify solely with pure prakrti. They may create whatever universes
they wish out of the domain of their mastery and thus be the
ishvaras (lords or gods) of a given universe. But this is not yet
kawvalya. Through this misidentification they may again enter
(VM) cycles of samsara, even though the cycle is at the scale of a
universe and their incarnations span the cycles of creations and
dissolutions

A truly liberated being is beyond any interest even of this ambi-
tious scale True dispassion is beyond an interest in even the sub-
Uest form, beyond even a desire to drink the ambrosia of the gods
(NB) Thisis the explanation of the condition of vairdgyva as given
by Vyasa

When one has lost the craving for matters perceptible, such as
the opposite sex, food, drink, power and affluence, as well as
SOTRA 1.15 209
when one has lost the craving in matters that are heard of in
traditions and scriptures, such as the attainment of heaven or of
the states of videha and prakrti-laya...
Furthermore, there are two levels of vairdgya:
apara: not transcending
para: transcending, beyond
The current siitra deals with apara-vairdgya, which is an attempt at
dispassion towards the attractions described above. Para-vairdgya
will be dealt with in the next siitra. Apara-vairdgya is divided into
four steps (bhiimikas):

1. yatamdana: the initial effort

2. vvatireka: ascertainment

3. ekendriya: “pertaining to the single sense (i.e. mind) only”

4. vaShikara: control and mastery
Yatamana, the initial effort, is explained as follows:

«Resolving to discover from the gurus and the scriptures as to
what is of essence and meaning and what is not so in this
world (SS).

- Lprooting the mind from attractions (rdga) (HA).

- Understanding the nature of the freedom from craving (vi-trshna)
and through knowledge the practice of the means of developing
dispassion, such as seeing that worldly objects involve endless
troubles (such as gaining, guarding, loss and consequent grief)
and blemishes (such as violence to others in the entire process)
(\B, BG. NB)

-Sceing that the despoilers (Aa@shdias) such as attraction (rdga)
dwell in the mind, that they cause the senses to be drawn towards
worldly object) “May the senses no longer be drawn towards
these objects” this resolution, and an endeavour to bring about
the maturity of emotions (Aashdias) (VM. RY)

+ Reducing desires (1 aramdna) even though one 1s unable to give
up the objects of desire (NTC)

} vasireka, the second step, is explained as follows:
210 SUTRA 115

e Developing the ability to ascertain which of the despoilers, blem-
ishes, present in the mind, the emotions, have been brought to
maturation through the practice of discernment (viveka) (SS),
which are now in the process of maturing, and which have to
begin maturing at some time in the future (VM, RY, SS).

- Ascertaining which of the senses have been conquered and which
are yet to be conquered (VB, BG, NB).

« Ascertaining in which domains of attraction the dispassion has
been accomplished, and in which domains it is yet to be perfected
(HA).

«Abandoning those objects of desire towards which one has the
least attraction until finally only the one, the most attractive,
remains (NTC).

Ekendriya, the third step, is limited only to one sense, the mind. It
is further characterized as follows:

«One knows that involvement in perceptible and non-perceptible
objects is synonymous with suffering (SS).

-One’s mental energies behind the attractions, aversions, etc. have
matured so that they are incapable of activating the senses to-
wards the external forms and so forth (VM, VB, BG, NB, RY,
NTC).

- These attractions have become very weak (HA) and dwell only in
the mind as mere interest (aursukya) (VM, RY, SS).

«One knows that there remain only the mental conditions, such as
desire for honour and aversion to dishonour, so that one works
towards and finally accomplishes dispassion towards these (VB,
BG, NB)

Vashikdra, control and mastery, is defined by Vyasa:

The mind.
seeing the fault or the blemish that accrues in involvement,

Its state,
devoid of a concept of rejectables or acceptables even in the
presence of celestial and non-celestial objects and comprising
a disinterest in enjoyments, which occurs through the power
of pra-sankhyana (the realization of the difference between
matter and the spiritual self),

is termed vaShikdGra, mastery and control, that is, dispassion

(vairadgva)
SUTRA LIS 211
(Some of the defects and blemishes (doshas) one sees in the worldly
involvement have been explained above, but 2 more complete state-
ment about them is made in Sitra II.15.) When this view has been
perfected, one rises above the first three steps of dispassion, in the
last of which there remained yet a mental interest in the objects of
the world even though the inclination of the senses to indulge has
been withheld or restrained. Up to that point one should stay away
from the presence and sight of temptations because in their presence
the mental interest might, and often does, awaken and activate the
sense, making the practitioner open to the danger of abandoning
(NB) the path altogether. This, however, is not the situation in the
case of vashikdra. Here, even in the presence of objects there is
neither attraction nor aversion. It is important that there be neither
acceptance nor rejection, but rather indifference. In vashikdra there
are no more injunctions to and from, no commandments or prohi-
bitions, no idea of “rejectables and acceptables,” but total neutrality
(NTC). When such neutrality is accomplished, even the closest
presence of the objects of enjoyment does not distract the mind
(BG, NB, RY). One says that “I am not under the control of these
objects, but rather they are the objects of my control (vasha)” (BR,
NB, RY)—not merely because one has seen the faults of worldly
pursuits, but because the power of internal discrimination, the
knowledge of the difference between prakrti and the spiritual self,
ls gathering strength. Because this last step, vashikara, is the culmi-
nation of the previous three, they are not separately stated in the
Yuga-sitras or by Vyasa (VM). Furthermore, this lower dispassion
(apara-vairdgya) falls within the practice of samprayfidta samadhi
but is external to asamprajynata, which 1s beyond, and in which the
higher dispassion (para-vairagya) develops Of that, in the next
sutra
212 SUTRA 116
Sitral16 aq at Tereaatraqeay)
tat pararh purusha-khyater guna-vaitrshnyam
tat: that (dispassion) (is)
param: supreme, transcendent, of higher kind
purusha-: (as regards) the conscious being, the spiritual self, spiri-
tual noumenon
khyateh: through discernment
guna-: (for) the attributes of matter (that is, prakrti), namely,
sattva, rajas, tamas
vaitrshnyam: state of being free of all craving

That dispassion is of the higher kind, transcendent, supreme,

when it is the freedom from all craving for the attributes, gunas,

arising through the realization of the spiritual self, purusha.
Vyasa’s Commentary

One who sees the faults and blemishes of objects perceptible and
of those heard of in the traditions and scriptures, is dispassionate
(virakta).

One whose buddhi is filled, expanded and satiated with increased
and strengthened discriminating wisdom because of the purification
that occurs through repeated practice of realizing and seeing (dar-
Shana) the spiritual self is dispassionate (virakta) towards the gunas,
whether with manifest or unmanpfest attributes.

These are the two kinds of dispassion (vairagya). Of these two,
the latter is no other but clarity (prasada) of knowledge. When it
arises, discernment (khy@ti) rises equally and then (the yogi) con-
templates and observes thus:

« Whatever was to be attained has been attained

+ The afflictions which were to be eliminated have been eliminated.

+The fast-jointed (RP), transitional (sankramah) chain of birth

(BB) and becoming has been broken, without the breaking of
which one is born and dies, one dies and 1s born, again and
again.
SUTRA 1.16 213
The ultimate limit of knowledge itself is dispassion. Immediately
after this very dispassion follows isolation (kaivalya).
Discussion
The last siitra explained the lower dispassion (apara-vairdgya).
Up to here (VM) the growth of sattva has washed off the inertia of
tamas, but the dust of rajas yet clings to the mind-field. It is
reiterated by Vy4sa here:
One who sees the faults and blemishes of objects perceptible and
of those heard of in the traditions and scriptures, is dispassionate
(virakta).
When (RY) the practice of the eight limbs (avigas) of yoga has led
to partial purification of the mind, when one has seen the flaws in
involvement with worldly objects, and has finally reached the vai-
ragya of the level called mastery (vashikara), then this lower vai-
ragya serves as the means (VM, RS) to the higher dispassion. In
other words (VB), the lower dispassion is only with regard to
vishayas, the objects of the world. The higher dispassion (para-
vairagya) is with regard to gunas (VB, BG, NB) and with regard to
knowledge (jfidna) (VB, NB) and the means thereof (BG). Even
knowledge has some similarity with the vishayas. Even though
knowledge shows that worldly objects are perishable, its purpose is
to remove ignorance (VB, BG, NB); it may even lead to temptations
like the siddhi of omniscience (HA). The knowledge that causes
awareness of the faults of the vishayas does not by itself lead to
that vairdgya (VB, BG, NB) in which one might say “Enough!”
(“Alam!”) to even viveka-khyati, the knowledge of the separate-
ness of the self and the non-self. This siitra points out that when
the correct knowledge (samyak-jfidna) has eradicated ignorance,
then there develops indifference (upeksha) towards even the fact of
that knowledge, towards the means which led to that knowledge
(VB, BG, NB) and towards the causes of all effects because now
the yogi has reached the satiety (trpri) of dwelling within the self
(VB, BG).
214 SOTRAIL16

That is to say (BG), when one has mastered the lower vairagya,
he now further firms up his knowledge of the separateness of the
gunas and the spiritual self (viveka). This is dharma-megha, the
samadhi of the raincloud of virtue and of the knowledge of the
nature of all things. As a result, one abandons all craving for the
gunas, which had hitherto served as the instruments (upa-karanas)
of self. That self is no longer interested even in the fact of being
separate from anything such as those gunas. This is the culmina-
tion, perfection, of that state in which knowledge is at its clearest
(jfiana-prasadda). This is self-knowledge (@tma-jfidna). This is the
higher dispassion.'4 Vyasa says:

One whose buddhi 1s filled, expanded and satiated with increased
and strengthened discriminating wisdom because of the purifica-
tion that occurs through repeated practice of realizing and seeing
(darshana) the spiritual self is dispassionate (virakta) towards the
gunas, whether with manifest or unmanifest attributes.

In the above reading the phrase purusha-darsShana-abhyasa ‘the
repeated practice of realizing and seeing the spiritual self? means
that (VB) one has received knowledge through agama, scriptural
authority, anuma@na, one’s own inference, and G@charya, a realized
teacher who has himself experienced self-realization. Thereby oc-
curs (VB) the purification of intelligence (buddhi) as rajas and
tamas are eliminated and one-pointed concentration on sattva ina
single, unbroken stream (eka-ta@natda) is accomplished. The buddhi
thus purified is

@-pyayita. filled and expanded with

pra-viveka: increased and strengthened (prefix pra) discriminating

knowledge

that (VB) purusha 1s pure and infinite, that the gunas are just the
Opposite, and that (BG) the power called consciousness (chitt-shakti)
is immutable, etc. ( YS 1.2). There accrues a satiety (trpti) in such a
buddhi, for it has now completed its purpose of serving the purusha.
14 VB tries to reconcile Sankhya-yoga with Vedanta by saying that this means the realiza-
tion of either individual self or the Supreme Self
SUTRA 116 215
[Being] dispassionate (virakta) towards the gunas, whether with
manifest or unmanifest attributes,
means that (HA) one is indifferent towards (a) their manifest attri-
butes: those that constitute knowledge of, and consequent activity
in, the gross, visible world as well as the subtle, invisible worlds;
and (b) the unmanifest attributes as experienced by the videha and
prakrti-laya yogis.

It is this lower-level vairdgya that is said to be the means of
reaching the prakrti-laya state in texts such as Sankhya-karika.
The yogis of these categories, then, do not go beyond apara-vairdgya
to para-vairdgya; they have not reached (VM) dispassion towards
the unmanifest attributes. Vyasa says:

Of these two [levels of vairagya], the latter is no other but clarity

(prasada) of knowledge.
To summarize (VM): Even though the mind-field’s primary con-
stituent is sattva, it becomes smeared with rajas and tamas. We
have stated above that tamas is overcome by lower dispassion.
Higher dispassion also eliminates the effects of rajas. (The word
rajas in Sanskrit also means “dust.”) Thus washed by the pure
streams of practice and dispassion and free of the dust of rajas, the
mind is now clear. This clarity is expressed by the word prasdda,
which (a) suggests the image of clear, flowing water in which no
dust swirls about, and (d) indicates a state of happiness, joyfulness
and intense pleasantness felt in the mind. The suffix md@tra, trans-
lated here as “no other but,” expresses the fact that this clarity of
mind is such that the mind in meditation now requires no external
objects, not even as objects of concentration.

This is the explanation of Vydsa’s passage offered by VM, but it
is incorrect. No matter how much the clarity of sattva may be
emphasized, the passage cannot refer to a state of mind. The pas-
sage fits the definition of higher dispassion in which all three gunas,
including sattva, have been transcended and all dependence on the
evolutes of prakyti, including the mind-field, has ceased. The knowl-
edge of gunas is certainly not indicated here. The correct reading is
216 SOTRALI6
that the passage refers only to the pure state of self-knowledge,
which is (VB) synonymous with that freedom from all craving
(vaitrshnya), the other definition of higher dispassion. This purity
of self-knowledge constitutes freedom from attraction to the mani-
fest or unmanifest forms of the gunas. When such purity of knowl-
edge arises, says Vyasa,
discernment (khy@ti) rises equally and then (the yogi) contem-
plates and observes thus:
« Whatever was to be attained has been attained.
« The afflictions which were to be eliminated have been
eliminated.
« The fast-jointed (RP), transitional (sartkramah) chain of birth
(BB) and becoming has been broken, without the breaking of
which one is born and dies, one dies and is born, again and
again.
The ultimate limit of knowledge itself is dispassion.
The three fulfilments or accomplishments appear to be a summary
of the seven grounds of attainment described in YS 11.27. “What-
ever was to be attained [that 1s, self-knowledge] has been attained.”
“The afflictions” (kleShas), together with all the propensities (vd-
sanas) produced by them, have been eliminated. As to the “fast-
jointed, transitional chain of birth and becoming,” it refers to the
continuous cycle of birth and death (samsd@ra), which is part of the
cycles of creations and dissolutions, resulting from the accumulation
of good and evil actions. Its segments or joints (parvas) are the
very states of transition through which one passes, wandering from
body to body to become one person or another through number-
less series of transmigrations. (More of this process 1s explained in
the discussion on Sitras I].12 and 11.13.) This cycle continues until
the final dispassion is reached. According to Vyasa, again:
The ultimate limit of knowledge itself is dispassion. Immediately
after this very dispassion follows isolation (kaivalya)
The samadhi which is synonymous with kaivalya 1s a-sampra-
jhata. Asamprajfidta follows dharma-megha (YS 1V.29-31), the
SOTRA 116 217
samadhi of the raincloud of virtue and of the knowledge of the
nature of all things. The higher dispassion is the condition of
dharma-megha (VM), and without it asamprajfiata cannot be
reached either by knowledge or by the practice of yamas, niyamas
and the other limbs of yoga (VB). RY summarizes the entire pro-
cess as follows:

«A person receives authoritative knowledge from the guru.

« He develops discernment (khyati).

«By the practice of khydti, the initial stage of dharma-megha de-
velops.

eThis destroys the blemishes (mala) (compare the Latin word
macula) of rajas and tamas from the mind-field, causing the
mind to be purely sattvic and filled with prasdda.

«The higher state of dharma-megha is then realized, which is the
same as the dispassion towards gunas.

+The concomitant of this dispassion is the awareness that the
reservoir of karma is cleared, all kleshas have been eliminated
and total self-knowledge has been gained.

¢ Then the highest dispassion of asamprajfiata samadhi ensues.
218 SOTRAI17
Sitral17  feaeRrareaaraieaareararg
THU: |
vitarka-vichdranandasmita-ripanugamat
samprajfiatah
vitarka-: gross thought
vichara-: subtle thought
Gnanda-: ecstasy, rapture
asmita-: 1-am-ness
rapa-'5; nature, form, appearance (of)
anugamat: through accompaniment (of)
samprajfnatah: samprajfiata, lower samadhi, cognitive samadhi,
samadhi of wisdom
Samprajftata, the samadhi of wisdom, occurs through the ac-
companiment of the appearances (RP, BB) of gross thought
(vitarka), subtle thought (vichdra), ecstasy (@nanda) and I-am-
ness (asmitd).
Vyasa’s Commentary
Now, when one’s vrttis of the mind-field have been brought
under control (niruddha) through the two means (abhydsa and
vairadgya), in what ways is samprajfidta samadhi said (to ensue)?
[Satra:] Samprajfata, the samadhi of wisdom, occurs through
the accompaniment of the appearances of gross thought (vitarka),
subtle thought (vichara), ecstasy (@nanda) and l-am-ness (asmita).
The mind-field’s gross expansion (@bhoga) towards the supportive
factor is called the gross thought (vitarka). The same when it is
subtle is the subtle thought (vichara). Rapture is ecstasy (@nanda).
The perception of a unified self is l-am-ness (asmitd).
There the vitarka-conjoint samadhi actually accompanies all four.
15 Some texts do not include the word rijpa (nature, form, appearances) as part of the
siitra
SOTRA I.1gZ 219
The second one, with the gross thought (vitarka) having been ter-
minated, is accompanied by the subtle thought (vichdra). The third
one, with the subtle thought having been terminated, is accom-
panied by ecstasy (Gnanda). The fourth one, with that ecstasy hav-
ing been terminated, is merely I-am-ness (asmitda). All these sama-
dhis are dependent on, conjoint with, or accompanied by supportive
factors.
Discussion
I. The Stages of Samadhi
So far yoga in general has been defined in Sitras 2-16. In Vydsa’s
commentary on Sitra 1 it was stated that
Yoga is samadhi.
Now (VB) the specifics of that samadhi are being described. When
one has brought the rajasic and tamasic vrttis under control (niro-
dha) by means of practice and dispassion (RY, SS), what are the
different ways or kinds of samadhi that follow? This is how Vyasa
introduces the siitra:
Now, when one’s vrttis of the mind-field have been brought under
control (miruddha) through the two means (abhydsa and vairdgya),
in what ways is samprajfiata samadhi said (to ensue)?
[Sdatra:] Samprajfiata, the samadhi of wisdom, occurs through
the accompaniment of the appearances of gross thought (vi-
tarka), subtle thought (vichdra), ecstasy (@nanda), and |-am-
ness (asmitd).
The definitions of samprajfiata in general are based on the deri-
vations of the word from:
sam: well, proper, deep, harmonized, balanced, holistic
pra’ forth, expansive, perfect, complete
Jha: knowing
As realization (sakshdat-kara) increases through its four stages (BG,
NB), samprajfiata, the samadhi in which wisdom (prajfid) comes to
220 SOTRA 117

its most harmonized, perfect expansion, is gained (VB). It is a
special type of cultivated concentration (bhavand) (BR, NB, AD,
SS). Bhavana means impressing the object of concentration (bhavya)
again and again onto the mind-field (BR) by preventing any other
object from entering the mind (NB). It is by bhdvand that the form
and nature of the object of meditation is completely realized (pra-
jfia) so fully as to leave no residue of doubt or the possibility of
viparyaya (YS 1.8) (BR, NB). This realization of the true nature of
the objects of meditation is called pra-jfid, the process of awakening
of wisdom, and prajfid, the wisdom itself.

Samprajfiata samadhi differs from asamprajfiadta, the acognitive
samadhi, in that the former requires Glambanas. The word dlam-
bana is translated here as “supportive factor.” In samprajfidta the
mind needs an object, whether of a gross or subtle nature, until
dharma-megha samadhi is reached. These objects on which the
concentrated thought of the mind is dependent are termed here the
supportive factors (@/ambanas).

Any of the categories of reality from the Sankhya system of
philosophy may be employed as an @lambana. For these categories
see TSS 2,3 and YS 11.19. Briefly, these can be (VB, NB, BR) any
of the following:

« Unconscious categories:

¢ prakyti, primordial matter 1.

+ 23 evolutes of matter 2-24.

« Conscious categories:

* purusha; individual self 25.

* an aspect or incarnation of godhead } 26

« God
Theistic Sankhya philosophers as well as most commentators on
the Yoga-siitras include the twenty-sixth category, God. An dlam-
bana, supportive factor, can be any combination of the above
categories, individual or cosmic. For example, in meditation on a
gross thought (vitarka), one may concentrate

-on the five gross elements, or

¢on any material forms (such as a flame, the sun, the moon, a

Star, etc.) or
SOTRA 1.17 221

«on the physical form of an aspect, or

eon the incarnation of the godhead (such as Vishnu, or Shiva, or

Jesus, etc., as venerated in Christian countries, or forms of
Buddha as taught in Buddhist lands) or
eon Virdadt, the Cosmic Immanent form of the godhead (an ex-
ample of which may be seen in BhG chaps. IX, X, XI).
However, when we look closely at the question on concentration,
it is found that among the conscious categories:

eonly the physical, incarnate form, or Vira, the cosmic form of

the godhead

«but not the formless consciousness of the pure spiritual self, nor

the formless transcendental Supreme Self

can be an G@lambana of the mind-field. The mind, an evolute of
unconscious matter, has no capability to grasp the pure conscious-
ness principle. Even a semblance of such grasping does not begin
until asmitd is realized, and only upon reaching discriminating
wisdom (viveka) (VB) does mind come within reach of the spiritual
principle, which is realized not as an Glambana of the mind but as
the free self. This is so in the case of the individual self; the tran-
scendental Supreme Self is far beyond.

The experiences to be realized in the four stages exist in everyone
as a potency (Shakti). The potency of each is realized and then
abandoned, left behind, till the final sam&dhi is reached (BR). The
mind cannot enter the subtlest stages at once—at least it is not the
common experience (prayashah) (NB). Hence it is said: The mind,
conquered at the grosser level, should then be led slowly to the
subtler factors. It is not likely that an average practitioner could
leap to the highest samadhi and gather the processes of the inter-
mediate states as part of such an instantaneous development. If
such an instantaneous process should occur, there would be no
need for such an order (NB) as described in this sittra. Only by
starting from gross objects does the mind gradually move to har-
mony with the subtlest and settle there (BG).

It is not that the realization of a relatively grosser object of
concentration by itself leads to the higher ground of a subtler
222 SOTRALI7

object. A material object cannot lead to spiritual realization because
even in its thought form only a vrtti is produced. Realization of
the true nature and form of an object of concentration only leads
to the siddhis which are described in YS HI and which are declared
(in the discussions on siitras such as YS 1.8, 1.15, and III.37) to be
undesirable goals for a true yogi’s pursuit.

What then is the purpose of such realization at these various
levels in sammprajfia@ta samadhi? They are to fulfil the purpose de-
scribed in YS 1.15,16: to develop dispassion towards each level of
the material evolutes. At each level one feels that the next subtler
level is purer. But upon examination by realization it is found that
the purity is only relative, at best derived from sattva, which is an
attribute of matter. Each level is successively found to be attended
by some faults and blemishes (NB) that have been described earlier.
Thus a vairdgya towards each successive state develops. Simply
perfecting the level of realization is not conducive to progress
towards isolation and liberation. It is only when full dispassion
develops towards that very experience and realization that the next
step can be taken towards a yet subtler object of concentration.

A basic principle of the Sankhya philosophy is that the cate-
gories of evolutes are divided in the order of causational succession
(VM, NB, RY):

«Each cause produces an effect.

-An effect is grosser, coarser—that is, more tangible, closer to the

world of senses and to the gross elements—than its cause.

«Concentration on each effect leads to the realization of the form

and nature of that effect

«When the mind’s vrttis concerning that effect are controlled, the

mind’s doors open to the cause of that effect.
A tangible object is seen, experienced, thought of, contemplated,
but its cause is hidden, intangible. When we see a jar, we normally
do not think of the clay the jar is made of. But when the realization
of the nature of the jar reaches a certain fulness, the clay becomes
more real and the jar becomes more a subsidiary of clay. As the
mind focuses on the normally experienced, conventional nature of
SUTRA I17 223
an object, it slowly transcends its tangible nature and grasps the
intangible, the cause which was previously not seen, experienced,
thought of, or contemplated (NB). This is the meaning of progress
in Sankhya-yoga: When the mind becomes as unified with the
object of concentration as a red-hot ball of iron is with fire, the
former ground is abandoned and the next exercise to gain the yet
higher ground begins (VB, NB).

Another Sankhya principle is:
An effect is less real, durable, stable;
a cause is more real, durable, stable (NB).
A jar breaks easily; its durability and stability is minimal compared
to that of its cause, the clay. It is for this reason that the subtler
objects of concentration lead to greater stability of the mind.
« The vrtti of the effect is
« brought to nirodha, fully controlled, and
e dissolved into (/aya) the vrtti of its cause.
« Because a cause is always subtler, that 1s,
- less tangible,
«closer to the mind, buddhi and ahamk4ra, and thus to the
spiritual self,
« the next step in meditation is also always subtler.
Thus a process of nirodha and laya of the
¢ gross into subtle, and
- effects into causes,
continues until one reaches prakrti. According to Sankhya philos-
ophy
eeach effect carries within it the properties of all the successive
causes in a chain of causation which has led to that particular
effect as its end-product. But
seach cause carries within it only the potential of all the effects
likely to be produced within the chain of the succession of effects
starting from the given cause.
224 SOTRAI17
For example,
clay includes a jar only as a potential, but
«ajar includes both the nature of the jar as an effect
« and its cause, the clay itself.
Since the various levels of the samadhi of wisdom (samprajfiata)
lead from the vrttis of grosser effects to those of subtler causes, the
lower-level meditations include the subtler levels, but at each level
the former coarse experience is abandoned. The four levels of sam-
prajfidta are respectively:
sa-vitarka or vitarka-anugata: with vitarka or accompanied by
vitarka
sa-vichara or vichadra-anugata: with vichara or accompanied by
vichara
s@nanda or Gnanda-anugata: with Gnanda or accompanied by
G@nanda
s@smuta or asmita-anugata: with asmita or accompanied by asmutd
By the argument presented above concerning the chains of causa-
tion and their relevance to the different levels of samadhi, it is
clear that (VM, RS)
esa-vitarka samadhi actually accompanies all the other subsequent
factors also, namely, wichara, @nanda, and asmita
esa-vichara samadhi has abandoned vitarka but also accompanies
Gnanda and asmita.
*sGnanda samadhi abandons vitarha and vichGra but includes
asmita,
esdsmita samadhi has no other accompaniments
As to objects of concentration, since the mind must be brought
to gradual refinement, it must move along the scale of the various
evolutes of matter until it reaches an identification with the subtlest,
finest possible state. The twenty-four states of matter with which
the mind may identify are divided fourfold (YS 11.19):
1. The sixteen visheshas, distinct, specific forms of matter:
+ the five gross elements: earth, water, fire, air, space
SUTRA I17 225

« the five active senses: hands; feet; organs of speech, elimination
and generation

e the five cognitive senses: smell, taste, sight, touch, sound

« the lower mind (manas)

2. The six a-visheshas, the general causes of the visheshas, namely

« the five subtle elements (tan-mdtrds), the ‘merest measures
of those’ that produce the five gross elements; and

«ego (ahamkara), the identifying principle by which the
composite sentience (asmitd) begins to identify itself as
such-and-such being.

3. Linga-mdatra, the ‘barest sign’ of the presence of matter, the
subtlest evolute, mahat, the universal and individual buddhi. It
is the receptacle of the spiritual self, the point where a material
evolute first appears to unite with the spiritual self, producing
asmitd, l-am-ness, the composite sentience further defined in
YS I1.6.

4. A-linga ‘without a mark’ prakrti—principal matter—in the
state of equilibrium, not manifest as the phenomena of the
universe.

Of these, the visheshas, a-vi$heshas, and linga-mdatra are the dlam-
banas in samprajfiata samadhi. As the components of a sentient
personality, they are further divided into a scheme of apprehension
as follows:

« Visheshas, the objects apprehended by asmutdé, are grdhya, ob-
jects of apprehension. Ahamkdra, ego, is the instrument by
which asmita apprehends the gra@hyas. Ahammkara is grahana, the
instrument of apprehension.

« A-viSheshas, the five subtle elements, are also grahya.

- Litga-m@tra—buddhi or mahat—receives and reflects conscious-
ness from purusha, thus creating asmita, the composite sentience.
This, and not purusha, is the agent of apprehension. This 1s
grahitr, the one who apprehends

This scheme of apprehension is important in the classification of
samadhis, as will be shown in YS 1.41 and throughout this sitra:

+ Grahyas (objects of apprehension) are the field of concentration
in vitarka-accompanied samadhi and in vichdra-accompanied
samadhi.
226, SOTRA 117

«Grahana (the instrument of apprehension) is the field of con-

centration in the @nanda-accompanied samadhi.

« Grahitr (that which apprehends) is the field of concentration in

the asmita-accompanied samadhi.

The earlier yoga tradition, that of Patafijali and Vy4sa, states
these to be the objects of concentration. Any other objects are only
either parts or composites of these. Vy4sa states:

The mind-field’s gross expansion (@bhoga) towards the supportive

factor is called the gross thought (vitarka).

The word @bhoga ‘expansion’ means the awakening of a wisdom
(prajfa) in which a realization of the true nature of an object of
concentration has occurred (VM). It is a fulness or perfection of
the mind-field with regard to that object (VB). At the first level it
is considered gross (sthala) because the object of concentration is
in its gross form (VM), thereby giving to the mind the like vrtti,
the mind identifying with that form.

A note of care and caution should be given here regarding sam-
prajfiata concentrations, especially those on the sixteen visheshas,
and particularly the five gross elements. One may mistake these to
be concentrations on the external earth and earthly forms, etc.,
with all the gross elements. It should be remembered that (a) a
perception of gross elements in the ordinary world falls within the
category of pratyaksha-pramana, direct perception, a vrtti to be
controlled, and (b) holding the perception in the mind is memory,
another vrtti to be controlled. For the practice of samadhi the
concentration on these factors is internal, as they exist, operate
and are apprehended within the sentient personality. It is therein
that their nature is observed and mastered.

It needs to be noted that this concentration consists of the con-
vergence of the particular evolute, as one of the subjectively in-
herent components of the inner sense, antah-karana (see p. 230) or
chitta, with its counterpart in the objective world. For example,
since mind is the controller of all the senses, their powers and
those of the objects of the senses are all included in the mind. The
SOTRA 117 227
mind concentrates on the objects and assimilates the vrtti arising
from the same; thus the lower-level agent of concentration, the
lower mind (manas), and the object of concentration converge and
merge, establishing a unity, a fulness and perfection of the wisdom
of that level. This applies not only to sa-vitarka but to all the levels
of samadhi.

I. Sa-vitarka Samadhi
As an archer under training first learns to shoot at a wider and
more visible target, so the yogi first develops his attention on a
grosser form and then moves towards a subtler one (VM, RY).
Virat as well as the manifest or incarnate forms of a deity and also
the sixteen visheshas are the gross objects of concentration. Taking
such an @lambana, one concentrates on its (NB, BR, BG)
e whole aspect and
«parts,
«past, present and future manifestation(s),
«nearness to one (as within the person or in the proximity of the
senses), or
distance,
edesirable or undesirable qualities, or the faults inherent in the
fact that it 1s constituted of the gunas,
«even those manifestations that one has
« not seen personally,
¢ not heard of in the teachings,
* not contemplated with the mind.
The concentration tncludes
«examining all relevant order and sequences, and
¢ cultivating the full grasp of
¢ words or names,
« their meanings (that is, the object denoted by the word),
and
« the knowledge consisting of the relationship between the word
and the meaning.
A process of thought examining these details of an object 1s called
vitarka in the normal language. In yoga it has the technical sense
228 SUTRA117
of concentration on the sixteen visheshas, with attention to these
aspects, with the goal of finally realizing the whole nature of the
object. One need not at first concern oneself with regard to those
aspects of the object of concentration which may not be within
one’s reach; for example:
«being too subtly hidden within the personality,
«too distant,
enot seen,
enot heard of, or
enot ever contemplated!
As concentration is mastered and refined, the next step comes into
view and the hidden nature of the Glambana is gradually revealed
(NB) in the natural process of yoga. The concentration should
remain constant, continuously maintained (ava-dhdrana) (VB). By
cultivating it thus, the bhavand then causes the object, the sense of
its perception, and the mind to become one. This entire process
explained hitherto is called vitarka. In the final realization of the
nature of the object the knowledge of all the aspects listed above
occurs at once, not in sequence, not in parts, not apart from the
perceiving mind. When such a total, whole realization is main-
tained without a break, that state is termed “the samadhi accom-
panied by vitarka.” It is grahya-samdapatti (YS 1.41); its field of
command is grahya, the objects grasped, within the gross body. It
is further divided into sa-vitarka samadhi and nir-vitarka samadhi,
which will be explained in Sitras 1.42 and 1.43.
IIT. Sa-vichara Samadhi
Seeing that sa-vitarka samadhi is still involved only with gunas
and their products, the yogi rejects it and thereby opens the doors
to the next, sa-vichadra samadhi. Vyasa says:
. the gross thought (vwitarka) The same when it 1s subtle is the
subtle thought (wichdra)
The vitarka refined becomes vichdra. The word should not be
taken in its dictionary meaning of “thought.” It is used here in a
SOTRA 117 229
sense specific to this science (VB).

The word vi-chdra is derived from vi + char, expressing a pro-
gressive movement. Here it means the movement of the mind away
from gross objects to subtler objects of concentration (VB). Having
seen the faults of the involvement in gross objects, however per-
fectly realized in sa-vitarka, one looks at the causes of those gross
objects, which inhere in them. The yogi thus moves from the sixteen
vifheshas (products of the a-visheshas) to the six a-vifheshas them-
selves. He concentrates on these subtler essences of the elements
and on the senses (NB, BG)

e with each of their parts, and

« the totality of their wholeness (NB, BG), including their

* space,

« time, and and their relationships,

« attributes,
together with all the details explained on p. 227. The mind takes
the form of the vrtti of concentration and becomes identified with
it. Vichara then becomes the expansion (&@bhoga) of chitta towards
the subtle @lambanas, awakening wisdom (prajfia), in which the
realization of the true nature of an object of concentration occurs.
It is the same fulness and perfection of the mind-field with regard
to subtle objects of concentration as has already been described
with regard to the gross objects on pp. 226-27.

It 1s well here to examine a point made by a commentator in
relation to sa-vichara samadhi. HA(E) suggests that vichadra is a
refined analytical process. The philosophical analysis of the rela-
tionship of prakrti evolutes with 4tman and Brahman finally leads
to the realization that “I am none of these prakrti evolutes with
which I have identified the self.” But such an analytical process is
part of the practice of intense vichadra contemplations on the path
of sAdna-yoga as taught in the Vedanta lineage. For the purpose of
yoga practice according to Patafijali and Vyasa, it will fall within
(a) the anumdna-pramana, inference as valid proof, a vrtti to be
brought under control, or (b) svadhydya, the study of scriptural
sentences leading to liberation, the fourth of the niyamas (which
230 SUTRA I17

are the second aviga of yoga) (YS 11.32). Both of these, the pramana
vrtti and svadhydya, are left far behind when one begins to enter
samadhi. Therefore vichara here does not denote an analytical
thought process. It is a technical term (tdmtriki paribhash@) for a
particular concentration on certain evolutes in order to master
their nature and then to negate their influence on the ego (aham-
kara).

Among the subtle evolutes, the objects of this realization are

«the five tan-mdtrds, subtle elements in the subtle body, the causes

of the five gross elements and the subtle essences of the five
cognitive senses (smell or odour, flavour or taste, sight or illumi-
nation of forms, touch, sound), and

eaharmkara, ego.

As the immediate cause of the tan-matras, ahamkara begins to be
brought under control in this samadhi, but primarily it is the object
of concentration in the next samadhi.

Some commentators (BR, SS) prefer to replace aharhkara with
the total antah-karana, the inner sense, which is collectively called
chitta in yoga and is threefold in Sankhya:

1. manas, mind, which is one of the sixteen visheshas, the objects
of concentration and realization in sa-vitarka samadhi
2. aharhkara, ego, included by all commentators as one of the six
a-viSheshas, objects of concentration and realization in the
later stages of sa-vichara samadhi, and in sananda samadhi
3. mahat, buddhi, intelligence, /uiga-mdtra, the first evolute of
prakrti, the object of concentration and realization in sa@smita
samadhi
It is obvious, however, in the light of the above definitions of the
various levels of samprajfata which specify the different compo-
nents of the antah-karana involved, that it would be erroneous to
assume that the entire antah-karana is an @lambana of sa-vichara
samadhi.

Even though the primary objects of concentration in sa-vichara

are five of the a-visheshas, with ahamkara only beginning to be
SUTRA ILI7 231
touched, it must be remembered, as explained on p. 223, that ef-
fects include causes; therefore, the subtler causes of the a-vishe-
shas are included: mahat (lirtga-mdtra) and prakyti (a-liriga). The
sa-vich@ra samadhi is also gra@hya-samdapatti (YS 1.41); its field of
command is grahya, the objects grasped, not in the gross body,
which is the field of sa-vitarka, but in the subtle body. Sa-vichara
is further divided into sa-vich@ra samadhi and nir-vichdra samadhi,
which will be explained in Sitras 1.42 and 1.43.

IV. Sananda Samadhi

About the third samadhi, Vyasa says:

Rapture is ecstasy.
The word for ecstasy, Gnanda, does not denote here bliss, the
Gnanda of Brahman, who is the Supreme Self. It is initially the
property called sukha, pleasure inherent in the sattva-guna. In
Gnanda-accompanied samadhi the yogi captures the pleasure of
sattva.

Sattva, as one of the three gunas, is part of the entire scheme of
prakrti and its evolutes. Even though that scheme includes the
delusion of tamas and the pain of rajas as well as the pleasure of
sattva, beings involve themselves with the world only in pursuit of
the pleasure of sattva. It is that attachment to the pleasure derived
from sattva which causes bondage and which initiates the con-
tinuance of sammsa@ra. In sa-vitarka and sa-vichara samadhis the
realized wisdom shows one the futility of pursuing the various
objects of concentration, starting from the vitarka of the earth
element and going up to the vichdra of the subtle elements and
possibly the initial stages of ahamkdra, the ego. As the evolutes
gradually dissolve into their subtler and yet subtler causes, in
sananda samadhi they dissolve into aharnkara. Since tamasic aharh-
kara produces the elements, and sattvic aharnkara produces the
mind and cognitive senses, both with the aid of rajas, it can be seen
that a gradual refinement of awareness would lead a yogi to the
more subtle sattva of aharnkara. Even though like all other evolutes
it consists of all three gunas, rajas and tamas here are subordinated
232. SOTRAI17

to sattva (SS), especially now that the yogi has ascended beyond
the vitarka and vichadra grounds. The essence of pleasure that was
tasted through the lower evolutes has its fount here. The yogi then
concentrates on the pleasure of sattva of ahamkadra and enjoys a
state of rapture (VB). Most mystics have mistaken this to be the
bliss of God, which is yet far beyond.

This pleasure, Gnanda, must also be seen (BG, NB)

¢ in its parts, and

e as a whole,
until the oneness of the enjoyer and the enjoyed is perceived and
the expansion (4bhoga) of awareness to a fulness occurs, that is, its
nature is fully realized.

In the Gnanda-anugata samadhi the only vrtti (VB) that prevails
is,

“I am in pleasure, happy, enraptured.”
VB quotes:

He knows that ultimate pleasure which is grasped by intelligence

(buddhi), and which 1s beyond the senses. It is that settled wherein

he is no longer shaken from reality... . Know that to be the

freedom from the contact with pain; it 1s called yoga.

Bhagavad-gita V1.21,23

Even though mahat or buddhi proper is not reached until the next
(asmita-accompanied) samadhi, the sattvic nature of mahat here
filters through into aharhkara, adding to the rapture.

Those who reach only this far (to sananda samadhi) are lost in
mystic ecstasy and consider that to be the supreme attainment.
Many powers (siddhis) may attend upon them. They have mastered
the ego of the body—everything from the body made up of the
viSheshas to the ahamkara—and are called videha, the bodiless
ones (for which see the discussion in Sitras I.15 and I. 19).

The field of this s@nanda samadhi is grahana, the instruments of
apprehension (to be discussed in Sitra 1.41), and includes in the
SOTRA L17 233
object of concentration its inherent causes, asmita and the a-linga
prakrti. Unlike sa-vitarka, nir-vitarka, sa-vichadra and nir-vichara,
this samadhi is not subdivided (for example, into sdnanda and
nir-Gnanda).

A summary discussion of selected commentators on the subject
of sananda and sasmita samadhis follows. Even though a@nanda-
accompanied samadhi is still the topic, the question under discus-
sion below will not be understood without defining asmita-accom-
panied samadhi. It must be clearly pointed out here that there is
little agreement among the commentators with regard to the objects
of concentration in both @nanda-accompanied samadhi and the
next, asmita-accompanied, samadhi. Table 1 presents a summary
of their views. These views will be examined one by one in the
order shown in the table, according to the object of concentration
in @nanda-accompanied samadhi.

Rapture inherent in the senses. VM (and RY) have given com-
pletely erroneous explanations of the cause and nature of the rap-
ture in this samadhi. VM says:

Because the nature of sattva is illumination—mahat is predomi-
nantly sattvic and all the senses are derivatives of mahat—the
chitta’s expansion (abhoga) in concentration on the sattvic plea-
sures inherent in the senses is the rapture of this samadhi.
TABLE 1 Objects of Concentration,
According to Various Commentators
Object of Concentration
Commentators Ananda-accompanted Samadhi Asmita-acc ompanied Samadhi
VM, RY, BM Rapture inherent in the senses Purusha qualified by aharhkara
VB, BG, NTC Rapture Purusha both as jiva and igshvara
ss Mahat with dominant sattva Mahat with pure sattva
penetrated with a residue of
Tajas and tamas
NTB Senses Purusha qualified by aharnkara
HA(E) Rapture experienced in total Buddhi whose vytti 1s intent upon
relaxation of senses and antah- purusha
karana
BR Ahamk4ara Buddhi
234 SUTRA I17

While this statement is correct in pointing out the source of the
pleasure in the senses, it is absolutely incorrect in suggesting that
the object of concentration here might be that pleasure inherent
in the senses. VB, in refuting VM’s view, points out that such
a suggestion confuses this @nanda-accompanied samadhi with sa-
vitarka and sa-vichara, in which the full realization of the nature
of senses has already occurred and they have been abandoned as
unworthy of pursuit. If the pleasure inherent in the senses were the
object of concentration in this samadhi, they would produce the
kind of vrttis in which attraction and aversion are implied. This
would—like the sa-vitarka and nir-vitarka samadhis, and the sa-
vichara and nir-vichara samadhis—necessitate two levels in the
Gnanda-accompanied samadhi:

» one with the vrtti, and then

- a higher one without the vrtti of the rapture.

Neither Patafijali nor Vyasa has suggested two divisions of this
samadhi, and therefore VM’s interpretation is erroneous.

VM, RY and BM, stating the rapture inherent in the senses to
be the object of the @nanda-accompanied samadhi, consider puru-
sha, qualified by aharnk4ara, to be the object of the asmitad-accom-
panied samadhi.This raises a question about mahat, the first and
finest evolute in the order of manifestation and the last to be
mastered. If aharhkara, the product of mahat, is the object in the
a@smita-accompanied samadhi, in what other samadhi would mahat
(buddhi) be mastered? Again, in what samadhi would asmitad be
realized? There are no further samadhis after the asmita-accom-
panied with any supportive factors (@lambanas) or objects of con-
centration. Nor does this conform to the scheme of apprehension,
which for the sake of clarity is repeated here:

+Sixteen visheshas, gross objects of apprehension (grdhya) in sa-

vitarka

Five a-visheshas, subtle objects of apprehension (grdhya) in sa-

vichara

¢ Aharhk@ra (the sixth a-vishesha), the instrument of apprehension

(grahana) in later stages of sa-vichara and in s@nanda
SUTRA I.17 235

« Linga-matra, mahat or buddhi, asmita, the agent of apprehen-

sion (grahitr) in sdsmita

Rapture alone. This view of VB, BG and NTC does not suffi-
ciently explain the source and nature of the rapture. VB states that
the realization of the increase of sattva, as the mind rises to higher
grounds in the vichdra-accompanied samadhi, is the rapture. Ac-
cording to BG the rapture also consists of the pleasure which is
identical to the realization of the general and particular aspects of
the objects of the vich@ra-accompanied samadhi. The same view is
supported by NTC. They all include ahamkara and mahat among
the objects of sa-vichadra samadhi. In this case, again, the grahya
and grahana become confused. Since Gnanda-accompanied samadhi
has grahana as its field, rapture (hlada) alone cannot be its object
of concentration; an instrument of apprehension like ahamkara
must find a place herein.

Mahat. The view held by SS that

mahat with dominant sattva penetrated with a residue of rajas

and tamas is the object in s@nanda, and mahat with pure sattva is

the object in sdsmita,
is closer to the truth. However, this view places ahamkdara in sa-
vichara, which again confuses grahya and grahana. Since buddhi
or mahat forming asmitd is the true agent of apprehension (grahitr)
and grahitr is the field of s@smita samadhi, it cannot be the object
of concentration in s@nanda, which holds grahana—ahamkara—as
its field. :

Senses alone. The objections presented to oppose the view that
rapture inherent in the senses is the object of concentration -in
s@nanda apply equally to the view of NTB that senses alone are the
object. Furthermore, NTB’s view that purusha qualified by aharh-
kara is the object of concentration in sésmita samadhi is untenable
because it presents ahamkara as grahitr, whereas it is actually
buddhi among the evolutes that unites with the reflection of puru-
sha to produce asmuta, the true grahitr. Moreover, NTB’s view is
incorrect because (a) purusha, being immutable, cannot be quali-
fied, and (b) it could not in any case be qualified by aharnkara at
236 SOTRAI17
all because purusha has no direct contact with ahamk4ra in the
universally accepted Sankhya scheme below:
Purusha wan
\ ee
reflection ———————————>>- mahat
| (buddhi)
asmita |
aharhkara
Asmitaé, the composite sentience, is produced by the union of pu-
rusha’s reflection with mahat (buddhi). Ahamkara is a product of
mahat and can have no direct contact with purusha. That being
the case, how can purusha be qualified by aharhkara?

Rapture of relaxation. HA(E) has presented the view that the
rapture arises from the feeling of relaxation in the five active senses,
the five cognitive senses and the three constituents of the inner
senses: manas, aharnkara and buddhi. There is no doubt experien-
tially that such is the case, but this view confuses the careful classi-
fication scheme of apprehension related to these samadhis and
therefore remains incomplete with regard to the ananda-accom-
panied samadhi. His statement, however, that the object of con-
centration in the asmitd-accompanied samadhi is buddhi intent
upon purusha is absolutely correct.

Ahamkara. Similarly BR’s view that aharmkara is the object in
sananda and buddhi in sa@smita is what we have accepted. How-
ever, BR errs in a different direction from the other commentators
in defining amanda. He seems to consider the pleasure of this
samadhi to be the attribute of consciousness (chiti-Shakt1) which 1s
without gunas. BR says:

When (concentration on the) sattva of the antah-karana some-
what penetrated by a residue of rajas and tamas is cultivated
(bhavyate), then, there being no gunas in the chiti-Shakti, the
SOTRA 1.17 237
excellence of its essence (sattva), whose nature is pleasure and
illumination, being cultivated, is called the Gnanda-accompanied
samadhi.

The entire statement seems self-contradictory. If the concentration
is still on the sattva of the antah-karana, then the pure conscious-
ness (chiti-Shakti) has not yet been realized. Furthermore, sattva,
whose nature is pleasure and illumination, is a part of prakrti and
not an attribute of chiti-Shakti. The reader can stretch the statement
somewhat and read it to mean that one is now closer to chiti-
Shakti, whose own bliss (sukha, pleasure in the case of the sattva
guna) and illumination have begun to penetrate the sattva of the
inner sense, causing the excellence of the latter’s pleasure and illu-~
mination to expand, thus overcoming the residue of rajas and
tamas. In any case BR’s comment suggests that in the @nanda-
accompanied samadhi sattva is still somewhat alloyed with a trace
of rajas and tamas.
V. Ahamkara and Asmita
Some commentators (e.g., BR) consider asmitd to be the coun-
terpart of the ahamkara evolute in Sankhya philosophy, but they
are mistaken. Aharmmkara has been left behind in the @nanda-
accompanied samadhi. The “samadhi of rapture” has been com-
pleted, in which the concentration on the ahamk4ra evolute has
been accomplished. If asmita and aharmk4ra were at all identical,
there would be no possibility of the asmita-accompanied samadhi.
Like many other commentators of the Yoga-siitras, BR insists
upon maintaining the identity of aharhkara and asmuta but divides
them by function, saying:
The identity of ahamkara and asmita should not be doubted.
Where the inner sense (antah-karana) referring to itself as “I”
(aham) apprehends the objects of experience, it 1s called ahamkara.
When the mind-field 1s turned inwards in the process of the
dissolution of the evolutes and in it a mere reflection of “presence,”
“existence,” appears, that 1s called asymutd.
While it is accurate that ahamkadra is outward-going towards the
mind, the senses and the objects of the senses and that asmitd 1s an
238 SOTRAI17

inwayd process that occurs in the inner face of buddhi, there still
cannot be an identity of ahamhkara and asmitad. Asmitda occurs in
mahat, which is subtler than its product, aharhkara.

VM also equates asmitd with aharhkara, even though in Sankhya
the senses are an evolute of aharhkara, not of mahat. VM says:

Senses are products of asmita. Therefore asmita is their subtler
form. That buddhi unified with the self (4tman) is referred to as
the “perception of a unified self.”
Here he confuses buddhi with ahamkara. The criticism directed at
BR also applies to VM in this regard.

Vyasa uses the term asmitd clearly as the equivalent of ahamkara
on YS II.19. Yet it is shown above in the present siitra that aharh-
kara is the object of concentration in the Gnmanda-accompanied
samadhi, and mahat is the object of concentration in the asmita-
accompanied samadhi. This seeming contradiction will be resolved
in the discussion on Sitra II.19. The definition of asmita given
here is accurate for the purposes of the present sitra.

VI. Sasmita Samadhi
Having fully realized ahamnkara in sdnanda samadhi, the yogi
s sees the flaws of the gunas present therein (NB). He therefore
develops distaste and dispassion (vairdgya) towards the powers
over matter (siddhis) and moves to the yet higher ground of the
asmita-accorapanied samadhi. Just as the products among the evo-
lutes are gradually dissolved into subtler and yet subtler causes,
ahamkdara dissolves into mahat, the universal and individual bu-
ddhi, the evolute called intelligence. Since

+ all the coarser evolutes have been dissolved, and

* mahat is the first evolute of prakrti,
it has no other object of concentration but itself. It is linga-matra,
a bare presence, ‘the first sign’ that prakrti gives of its presence.
The principle of convergence and unification of the object and the
agent of concentration (pp. 226-27) reaches its finest dimension
here., Vyasa says:
SOTRA 1.17 239
The perception of a unified self is I-am-ness (asmita).

Since the inner face of buddhi is the most sattvic, purest part of
the evolutes of prakrti, it is closest to the consciousness principle.
The rays of the consciousness principle reflect in buddhi as into a
clear crystal. They are amalgamated like a piece of white marble
thrown into milk, or milk poured into a clear, marble cup (RS). It
is here and nowhere else that purusha and prakrti meet. Just as the
sun seen in a mirror is not really the sun and is not affected by the
flaws in and the colours of the mirror in which its reflection is
seen, so also purusha is not affected by its reflection in the buddhi.
It is here in the union of the reflected ray and buddhi that ignorance
and bondage begins and ends, a process with which purusha has
no association. This is the primary constituent of the “person”; all
else are its projections, adjuncts and instruments. Here the person
first says “I am.” (This I-am-ness is asmitd.) “I am this conditioned,
delimited being, a composite of spirit and matter” (VB, VM, RY).
In realizing the nature of asmitd, one understands it as being the
final break between spirit and matter, whereby the two constituents
of the composite sentience,

« matter in its finest essence of the sattva of buddhi, and

+ the reflection of purusha therein,
dissolve their marriage. The phrase “composite sentience” will be
used interchangeably with “I-am-ness” to translate the word asmitda.
(Asmuta will be explained in detail under Sutra II1.6.)

Thus the asmuta@-accompanied samadhi means (SS) the realization
of mahat in which sattva is predominant. BR elucidates this by
contrasting it with the preceding samadhi as follows: In the @nanda-
accompanied samadhi, as BR pointed out (p. 236f.), sattva is still
somewhat penetrated by residual rajas and tamas. In asmitd the
rajas and tamas have been completely subdued and only the purity
of sattva dominates. With this purity the sattvic inward face of
mahat is turned away from its outward-facing evolute, aharhkara
or ego. When facing outwards it produces the ego, which in turn
produces mind, senses and their objects. When it is turned inwards,
240 SOUOTRAII17

the purity of its sattva receives the reflection of purusha, because
of whose life-force and consciousness channelled through the bu-
ddhi all the processes of the personality are initiated and sustained.
In the asmita-accompanied samadhi (BR) even this sattva becomes
subsidiary (nyag-bhdava) and the presence of chiti-Shakti is exalted.
There is only an awareness of existence (sattad-mdatra) alone with-
out any conditions, productions, evolutions or devolutions.

We have translated Vyasa’s eka-@tmikd samvit as “the perception
of a united self.” The sattvic illumination of the mirror of buddhi
and the reflected light of purusha are unified in asmitd. VB says
that the word eka ‘one’ here signifies “only one,” that is to say:
“Only one, the self (Atman), is its object.” He interprets this to
mean that in this samadhi there is only one @lambana, the mind-
field’s perception of only the purusha, by which one realizes that “I
am.” As the object of concentration merges with the agent thereof,
the agent, mahat or buddhi in this case, sees itself unified with the
spiritual self. In this view it is correct that buddhi is seen unified
with the spiritual self, but it is incorrect that the pure, unreflected
Atman is its object of concentration. Commentators such as VB
and NB have erred in stating that in sasmita samadhi one knows “I
am thus—thus alone,” that there is nothing further to know, and
that this is the ultimate ground of realization. Actually the realiza-
tion of 4tman does not begin until asamprajfidta, the acognitive
samadhi.

In the asmita-accompanied samadhi,

¢ first the object of concentration is asmnitd itself.

+ When asmita has been examined

+ in all its parts, and
+ as the complete whole,

e its nature 1s fully realized.

That realization means viveka-khyati, re-cognition of the separate-
ness of buddhi and purusha, and of the separateness of purusha
from the evolutes of prakrti--mind, body, etc. Purusha, the con-
scious principle, is twofold:
SOTRAI17 241

1. the individual jiva

2. the universal ishvara, godhead
Both of these reflect in the buddhi (VB, NB, BG). Of these, first
the realization of the jiva-self as apart from the false identifications
of buddhi occurs. Whereas the conditioned, manifest deity in a
pseudo-material] visual image is an object of concentration only in
the first two samadhis, here the quest for the formless God ensues
and an awareness of the presence of the Supreme Self occurs.
However, statements by the commentators that the final God-
realization takes place here are erroneous and at this point they
must simply have been carried away to make such stipulations.

This is grahitr-samapatti; the field of this samadhi is the agent
of all apprehensions (to be explained in Sitra I.41). Because of the
unified awareness, this samadhi also is not divided into sdsmita
and nir-asmita. Here mahat is finally dissolved into the unmanifest,
a-linga prakrti. Those who attain this state and consider it to be
the final destination are called prakrti-laya yogis. They have dis-
solved the evolutes into prakrti but not realized the self or the Self.
(For further details see the discussion on Sitras I.15 and 1.19.)

For those who continue further, the ultimate in the asmita-
accompanied samadhi is the beginning of dharma-megha, the sama-
dhi of the raincloud of virtue and of the knowledge of the nature
of all things (YS 1V.29). The lower dispassion (apara-vairagya)
(YS 1.15) is accomplished and the transcendent para-vairdgya (YS
1.15) commences.

To recapture the four samadhis in the words of Vyasa:

There the vitarka-conjoint samadhi actually accompanies all four.
The second one, with the gross thought (vitarka) having been
terminated, 1s accompanied by the subtle thought (vichara). The
third one, with the subtle thought having been terminated, is
accompanied by ecstasy (@nanda). The fourth one, with that ec-
stasy having been terminated, 1s merely I-am-ness (asmita). All
these samadhis are dependent on, conjoint with, or accompanied
by supportive factors.
242 SUTRA I17

These samadhis with supportive factors (salambana) are also called
seeded (sa-bija) samadhis, which will be explained in YS 1.46. The
terms salambana and sa-bija separate (VM) the samadhi of wisdom
(samprajfiata) from the acognitive samadhi (asamprajfiata), which
is seedless (nir-bija), and which will be explained in Sitra I.51. Of
the five states of the mind explained in Sitra I.1, the samadhi of
wisdom constitutes the fourth—ekagra, one-pointed—because it
requires objects of one-pointed concentration.

VII. Concentrations on a Deity

The question arises as to whether this methodical and analytical
approach is essential in order to prepare the aspirant for asam-
prajfiata samadhi. Is an allowance made for concentration on,
devotion to and an uplifting grace from God? What is the guidance
given in this matter?

In discussing the matter of godhead, the commentators have
mostly expressed their own religious credos and have tried to find
a place for it within the scheme of the Yoga-si#tras and Vyasa’s
commentary. (See YS 1.23,24 and I1.1,32,45.) According to them,
the realization of the various aspects or incarnations of the godhead
may fall into two categories (NB):

«In one the yogi develops his concentration to such a degree that

his expanded consciousness may ascend and project itself to the
subtle worlds which are the domains of particular aspects of the
godhead.

eIn the other the godhead is so pleased by the devotee’s japa

(mental concentration on a mantra) and meditation that he
projects an appearance of himself to grant the grace of his
descent and presence to the devotee. !6
As an experiential fact, however, the two cannot be separated. The
ascent of the devotee’s consciousness is the same as the descent of
the divine grace.

As has been stated above, if a devotee’s bhdvand is on a par-
16 See the authors’ book God (Honesdale, Pa Himalayan International Institute of Yoga
Science and Philosophy, 1979)
SOTRAI17 243
ticular deity, it is indeed required that the mind take this same
alambana through all the four stages of samprajfiata (VB, BG, NB)
in the order in which they occur. A failure to maintain this con-
sistency would, for example, mean (NB) repeatedly abandoning
one form of deity for worship of another, leading to constant
unsteadiness and fickleness of the mind, which is obviously contrary
to the pursuit of samadhi.

The order in which the four stages are practised and mastered is
important (BG, NB). It is clearly stated, however (BG), that if a
yogi makes a spontaneous ascent to a higher ground by the grace
of God, he then need not climb methodically and laboriously over
the lower steps (BG). Grace, then, is a shortcut which bypasses the
method. It must be remembered, however, that when one climbs to
a higher plateau through the force of such grace, the lower siddhis
attendant upon the practice of the earlier steps do not accrue. It is
only if for some reason one needs those siddhis—even though they
are irrelevant to one’s spiritual attainment, station and progress—
that he may go back down and practise the lower methods (NB)!
Although the possibility of such instantaneous realization of a
higher state is acknowledged, for the purposes here it is assumed
that a method is generally requisite for mental purification and
mastery in order that one may become a deserving vessel for grace.

As was mentioned earlier, in the tradition of Patafijali and Vyasa
all objects of concentration are either parts or composites of gra@hya,
grahana, or grahitr. For example, a candle flame for concentration
is part of the fire element. An icon may be considered a composite
product of all the five gross elements. The theism of yoga as ac-
knowledged in YS 1.23-28, I1.1,32,45 also encouraged the later
commentators to state more clearly that the mental image of Virdy,
the universe-form of God, or the figure of a deity or incarnation is
often used as the object of concentration. Even though at first
glance these mental images may appear not to be included in the
scheme of Patafijali and Vyasa, the theology of the Purana texts
explains that ishvara, God, may take forms that appear materia] to
the devotees, even though the energy used for such appearances is
actually non-material. From the point of view of a devotee seeking
244 SUTRA I.17

Samprajfiata samadhi, the form of such a divine manifestation is a
visible one, subject to experience with the senses; therefore, concen-
tration on such an image is concentration on the visheshas. One
begins concentration with mental devotions offered to the deity in
manifest forms. Hindus may devote the concentration to figures
like Vishnu and Shiva, Buddhists to the various forms of Buddha,
Christians to Christ, and so forth. In Siitras 1.23-29 the subject of
devotion to God is explained more elaborately. Here commenta-
tors primarily include among the objects of concentration a physical
appearance of the divine being or some other cosmic form manifest
in the material universe. Neither Patafijali nor Vyasa has dealt
with this form of concentration at this point, so it appears that the
concentration here is not on the Supreme Being as the Transcen-
dental Spirit as such but only on those manifestations of Him
which are possible among the evolutes which comprise the objects
of concentration in the sa-vitarka and sa-vichdra stages.

It is well to clarify how concentrations on a deity differ in the
first and second samadhis. In the discussions on the objects of
concentration in sa-vitarka the manifestations of ighvara are in-
cluded. In sa-vichara, when a deity is still the object of concentra-
tion, the visual image of a pseudo-material form is abandoned and
a subtler presence, perhaps with an appearance consisting of the
universal tan-matrds, is invoked, to which mental worship is offered.

On the other hand, a sadhaka not attracted to such mental
images of a deity may begin his concentration on other parts or
composites of the visheshas. As already mentioned, a single object
of concentration used as an d/ambana begins at the level of a gross
form and continues through the various stages of samprajriata.
VIII. The Systems of the Shariras and the Koshas

Before bringing this siitra to a conclusion, it needs to be shown
how the samadhis relate to the systems of the three bodies (Shariras)
and five sheaths (koshas) within the composite sentience (asmitd).
It must be borne in mind, however, that the classifications of the
various evolutes and faculties as apportioned among the different
bodies and sheaths are not unanimously agreed to and may differ
greatly in various texts.
SOTRA 117 245
As the-light of purusha filters down through asmitdé, the ego
process (aharhk4ra) causes one to mistake purusha or 4tman, the
spiritual self, to be a delimited and mutable being.
eIn Gnandamaya kosha the self, by nature devoid of the dichot-
omy of pain and pleasure, is mistaken to be happy or unhappy,
suffering pain or enjoying pleasure.
eln vijfianamaya kosha an assumption of delimited knowledge
and ignorance accrues.
eIn manomaya kosha the processes of mentation are attributed to
the self.
«In pranamaya kosha the self is thought to be the agent of ac-
tions.
eIn annamaya kosha a mortal personality, passing through vari-
ous physical states, is erroneously identified as the self.
As the process of samadhi advances, the assumptions of false iden-
tifications with each sheath are dropped and gradual freedom from
mortality, action, mentation, ignorance, pain and bondage is
achieved. One is sequentially freed from each level of assumed
bondage. This is the wisdom (prajfid) of the samadhi of wisdom
(samprajfiata). In the acognitive (asamprajfiata) samadhi the final
enlightenment occurs.
246 SOTRAI17
TABLE 2 Samadhis in the Three Bodies
Samadhi Supportive Factor (Alambana) Body
asmit@-accompanied asmita (mahat; higher buddhi) causal (kdrana sharira or
linga Sharira)
Gnanda-accompanied { lower buddhi
ego (ahamkara)
vichara-accompanied subtle elements subtle (sikghma shartra)
mind
subtle senses
vitarka-accompanied prdanas
external senses
five gross elements } gross (sthilla Sharira)
TABLE 3 Samadhis in the Five Koshas (Sheaths)
Kogha (Sheath) Supportive Factor (Alambana) Samadht
anandamaya (bliss) asmitd (mahat; higher buddhi) asmita-accompamed
viyfidnamaya (knowledge) lower buddhi Gnanda-accompanied
ego
manomaya (mind) subtle elements vichéra-accompanied
mind }
prdnamaya (prana) subtle senses
pranas
vutarka-accompanied
annamavya (food) gross elements
Bross senses
3 3
3 g z 3
tot i:
= &
2 8 5 5 8
Z 8 § ¢ 68
§ 3 ¢ ae
. z § = §
Pa 8
§ } t t t
Ny 8
s 8 i :
x 3S s S
Ze 5 : = 8
2s %
an
is) a
g oo
i ay:
8 23 n&
* g Sea o
oo
2 3
$ ES as
aN a ce os A
3H Zig
£3 a az
as
aS EB
3 /
s
5 g J
eT
2 § =
& FY
§ s
5 oid
5 25 or
B/S 338 ; a
E Eee 28 :
= So§ a>
3 838
2 § 63
5 s g)
F : e os
2 gf? et
F g
& 5
= = ~~
I
S 8
is) § . g i
3 x
3 5 3 §
mM) ¢ & z S
|S g 3
zl
248 SUTRA 1.18
Sitral.1s Paeraweaarvaraqad: AearTR asa: |
virama-pratyayabhyasa-pirvah sarhskara-
Shesho’nyah
virama-: cessation
pratyaya-: cognition principle, cognition, causal principle
abhyasa-: practice
purvah: preceded by, having as a prerequisite
samskara-Sheshah: leaving its sarnskara as residue
anyah: the other

(Asamprajfiata) is the other (samadhi), having as its prerequisite

the practice of the cognition and causal principle of cessation

and leaving its sarnskara as residue.
Vyasa’s Commentary

Now, what are the means to the acognitive samadhi (asam-
prajfiata) and what is its nature?

[Satra‘] (Asamprajnata) 1s the other (samadhi), having as its pre-

requisite the practice of the cognition and causal principle of

cessation and leaving its samsk€ra as residue.
When all the vrttis of the mind-field have submerged and only the
samska@ras remain as a residue, such control (nirodha) 1s the acog-
nitive (asamprajfiata) samadhi. [Or: When all the vrttis have ceased,
the control (nirodha) wherein only the samsk4ras remain as a resi-
due is the samadhi of the mind-field called the acognitive (asam-
prajrata).]

The means thereof is the transcendent dispassion (para-vairagya),
the practice with supportive factors (@/ambanas) 1s not efficacious
as a means of achieving it. Therefore the awareness of cessation,
devoid of object, 1s used as the supportive factor, and it 1s without
a substance, without interest!” or purpose

Preceded by such a practice, the mind-field which 1s without a
17 BB translates artha-shanva as “devoid of interests ”
SUTRA II8 249
supportive factor becomes as though it has reached a state of non-
being (abha@va). This is the seedless (nir-bija), acognitive (asam-
prajhata) samadhi.

Discussion
This siitra continues with the definitions of samadhis. Going
back to the last two of the samadhis of wisdom:
eIn the Gnanda-accompanied samadhi the mind’s identification
was, “I am happy.”
eIn the asmita-accompanied samadhi, the mind’s identification
with its vrtti of purusha’s reflection falling into mahat or buddhi
was simply, “I am.”
These thoughts are also supports (@lambanas) for the mind. So
long as these vrttis remain, dispassion (vairdgya) has not yet tran-
scended the lower limitations of prakrti, and the highest samadhi is
not reached. This siitra presupposes two questions:
1. What are the means to attain the acognitive samadhi?
2. What is the nature of this samadhi?
The first compound phrase in the siitra, viramma-pratyaya-abhydasa-
purvah, answers the first question, and the remainder of the siitra
(a phrase and a word), sammskdara-sheshah anyah, answers the second
question (VM). Or we may surmise that (VB)
¢ the first phrase explains the means (updya),
« the second phrase defines (/akshana), and
« the last word names the state aimed for (lakshya).
First let us take part of the phrase vir@ma-pratyaya-abhydasa-purvah.
This 1s explained in different ways:
«(VM) Virama is the absence of all vrttis. The awareness which is
its Cause 18 virama-pratyaya
«(VB) That even the vrtti may cease, such an awareness 1s virdma-
pratyaya. The transcendent dispassion says even to the wisdom
250 SUTRA ILJ8&
of samprajfdta, “Enough!” (“Let even the disturbance of such
knowledge come to pacification.”) Such an awareness is vir@ma-
pratyaya.
°(HA) Virama itself is the causal awareness of the absence of all
cognition. This transcendent dispassion itself is virdrma-pratyaya.
«(BR, AD) That by means of which one reaches cessation, that is,
one abandons all concern with vitarka and such supports, is in
itself (as the causal cognition) vir@ma-pratyaya.
¢(BG) That even the vrtti signified as the knowledge of reality may
cease—this is virdma-pratyaya.
«(SS) Even the effort to turn the vrttis off (uparama) is virdma-
pratyaya.
The practice of virama-pratyaya means constantly, repeatedly, en-
tering into that awareness (VM, VB). The process of virdma-pratyaya-
abhyasa is establishing it again and again into the mind-field (BR,
AD, BG, SS). It is brought to perfection when even the vrtti “I
am” from asmita is abandoned (HA). In other words, whatever
vrtti arises in the mind is rejected as
neti, neti: not this, not this.
The phrase “preceded by such a practice” means that this cessa-
tion is the prerequisite of the acognitive samadhi. This samadhi is
characterised by the presence of residual sarnskdras only (sam-
skara-Shesha).
We have translated a single sentence of Vydsa in two ways:
«When all the vrttis of the mind-field have submerged and only
the samskaras remain as a residue, such control (nirodha) 1s the
acognitive (asamprajfidta) samadhi.
Or
- When all the vrttis have ceased, the control (”irodha) wherein
only the sarnskaras remain as a residue is the samadhi of the
mind-field called the acognitive (asamprayfidta).
Both clauses, “vrttis of the mind-field have submerged” and “vrttis
have ceased,” are renderings for the image produced by the original
SOTRAII8 251
word, pratyastamaye. That is, they have set like the sun into the
very source from which they had arisen.

While the main intent of both possible translations of the com-
plete sentence appears to be the same, the most important differ-
ence in the second translation is in the phrase “samadhi of the
mind-field.” Actually, samprajfiadta is a samadhi of the mind-field
and asamprajfiata is not. Asamprajfidta is only the self dwelling in
the self. This was made clear in Sitra 1.3 and will be further
clarified in the fourth chapter of YS. This siitra, however, only
seems to contrast asamprajfidta with the samprajfidta of the pre-
ceding siitra by indicating not the nature of self in asamprajfata
but what happens to the mind-field after samprajfidta: simply that
it receives nirodha-samskAras.

In the second translation, therefore, “samadhi of the mind-field”
does not mean samddhi in the sense in which we generally use the
term; rather, the word samadhi in this instance signifies the deriva-
tive meaning from sam-da-dhd, that is, “harmonizing all conflict,
bringing together of all contrastive factors” so that the juxtaposition
between the mind and its supports (Glambanas) also ceases. Vyasa
says:

The means thereof is the transcendent dispassion (para-vairagya),
the practice with supportive factors (@lambanas) 1s not efficacious
as a means of achieving it.

It was explained earlier in Siitra 1.5 that the samskaras them-
selves produce vrttis, which in turn feed the sarnsk4ras. It was also
explained that sarnskdras are the dormant form of vrttis and that
vittis are the operative form of sarhskdras. When the vrttis are
brought totally under control and are pacified, they are no longer
fed into the sarnskaras. The sarhskaras cease to produce the opera-
tions of vrttis but simply lie as inoperative residue. The progressive
stages of the mind-field are as follows (BR):

evyutthana: absence of concentration, as in kshipta and miidha

(see Sitra I.1., p. 78)
«samdadhi-prarambha: the beginnings of samadhi, as in vikshipta
252, SOTRA 118
(ibid.) when sattva gains ascendancy
eekagrata: one-pointedness
enirodha: total control
The sarhskaras of vyutthana, worldly activity and stupefaction, are
brought under control as the sarhskadras of the next stage (the
beginnings of samadhi, however distracted) are nurtured. The sarh-
skaras of this second stage are replaced by those of one-pointed-
ness. Even the one-pointed vrtti must be pacified when final nirodha
gains strength. When total nirodha has occurred in the acognitive
samadhi, the transcendent dispassion produces no sarhskaras other
than its own imprints on the mind. The mind has now left the
neighborhood of the world and has begun to dwell close to the
spiritual self. All the former sarmskaras have been replaced by
those of nirodha. There being no next stage after this, no other
sarnskaras can replace the nirodha-samskaras, which then remain
as the residue.
We read from Vydsa:
The practice with supportive factors (@lambanas) 1s not efficacious
as a means of achieving it. Therefore the awareness of cessation,
devoid of object, 1s used as the supportive factor, and it is with-
out a substance, without interest or purpose.
This awareness is practised under two conditions:
During samadhi.
During ordinary involvement in the world.
One constantly bears in mind that worldly phenomena and rela-
tionships are not conducive to samadhi. While performing all the
necessary duties of the world, the yogi continues to turn the aware-
ness of the self on the self until the mind’s ordinary sarhskaras
become so weakened that samadhi 1s integrated with the wakeful
state. Up to this time it is interrupted constantly by the world but
now, even remaining open to the world, the yogi finds repose in
an uninterrupted samadhi. Such an awareness must be diligently
SOTRALI8 253
cultivated by whittling away the sarhskaras of objects, even of the
objects of concentration.

It must be borne in mind that between samprajfdta and asam-
prajfiata comes dharma-megha, the samadhi of the raincloud of
virtue and of the knowledge of the nature of all things. It is both

+ the higher stage of the asmita-accompanied, and

e the initial stage of the acognitive (asamprajfiata).

This will be more clearly defined in YS 1V.29. (VM) It cannot be
reached with supportive factors (4lambanas) of the preceding sama-
dhis. The lower vaira@gya cannot lead to it. A cause and its effect
must be homogeneous. The lower dispassion needs some objects of
concentration to lead to the lower samadhi. Dharma-megha sama-
dhi is described (VM) as arising from that state of buddhi in which
rajas and tamas have been completely washed off and the objects
of buddhi are transcended. It is the endless state wherein the yogi
perceives worldly objects as totally unworthy of attention and,
abandoning them, he dwells only in his own essential nature. Thus,
denying all supports, dharma-megha serves as the supportless (ir-
alambana) acognitive samadhi.

(VB) Mere one-pointedness can never produce such a state.
There is no object, short of purusha’s own abiding in his own
nature, that can lead to the acognitive samadhi. Even buddhi’s
vrtti with regard to the nature of purusha, as experienced in asmita,
must cease. To all such knowledge it must say, “Enough!” At this
point it seems Vydsa’s intent to say that the objectlessness becomes
the object of concentration. Whatever vrtti arises in the mind is
negated by neti, neti: that is, “This 1s not the self, this is not the
self.” The mind is thus left behind and purusha’s pure awareness is
turned inwards.

Vyasa says:

Preceded by such a practice, the mind-field which is without a
supportive factor becomes as though it has reached a state of
non-being (abhava)
254 SOTRALI8
The mind has not ceased to exist. But

«because its vrttis have become inoperative, its presence is not

noticeable;

«the awareness of spiritual self is so centered in the self that the

mind is no longer being used.
The yogi’s mind and body appear to have died. The lower aware-
ness has ceased. The mind is now truly objectless. One might think
that the mind was in a state of sleep; however, the word abhava
‘non-being’ used here reminds the reader of the definition of sleep
in Sttra 1.10:

Sleep is the modification or operation of the mind-field resorting

to the cognition principle of absence or negation and to the cause

thereof.
In Sitra 1.10 it was made clear that sleep is tamasic, whereas
samadhi is beyond the gunas. However, the yogi may often resort
to the abhava of vrttis in the mind for his rest rather than subject
himself to the tamas of ordinary sleep. This abhava-like state of
the mind, known to the Buddhist tradition as “no-mind,” is the
true nirodha. Its sarnskaras completely transform the nature of the
yogi’s mind.

The purpose of the nirodha-samskara remaining even as a resi-
due in the mind is so that the yogi may be able to get up from
samadhi (NB, BG) when he chooses and attend to simple bodily
needs in order to maintain his physical presence and thereby help
the world. He maintains total control over his mind so that he may
continue to use it as an instrument in the world. In this aspect also
nirodha means control, as all of the yogi’s personality systems are
operated by his yoga (yoga-yantrita) (NB).

Vyasa says:

This is the seedless, acognitive, samadhi.
THe term “seedless” (nir-bija) will be explained further in Sitra
1.51, but here it may be understood to mean that, there being no
SUTRA II8 255
further objects in the mind, the sarhskaras can no longer produce
vrttis, kKleshas, karmas, and consequent cycles. (BG, NB) This pre-
sence of the nirodha-sathskaras remains in the mind so long as the
yogi is embodied because the spiritual self needs a mind to operate
the body. When the spiritual self is disembodied and dwells in total
liberation (moksha), all dependence on material evolutes, including
the mind-field, is dissolved, and there are not even nirodha-sath-
skaras. This is the meaning of Vydsa’s statement artha-sShunyah,
which has been translated as “without a substance, without interest
or purpose.” The spiritual self is freed of contact with all delimiting
“substantiality.” Self has no more “interest” in prakrti, which has
already served its “purpose” (purushartha) and withdrawn. The
seeds of ignorance have been burnt in the fire of realization. '8
18, We strongly recommend to the student that he add to his reading on this stra from the
commentary in English by Swami Harharananda Aranya, Yoga Philosophy of Pataryali
(Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 1977).
256 SUTRA 1.19
Sitral19  wanerat freevetacarara
bhava-pratyayo videha-prakrti-layanam
bhava-pratyayah: (the samadhi) of causal cognition of being, at
(re)birth
videha-: (of) videha, bodiless, yogis, and
prakrti-layanam: of the prakrti-laya yogis, those who have merged
(the awareness) into prakrti

The samadhi of the bodiless (videha) yogis and of those who

have merged into prakrti (prakryti-layas) is called bhava-pratyaya,

the samadhi of the causal cognition of being. [Or: Samadhi
naturally experienced at rebirth comes to the videha and prakrti-
laya yogis. Or: Bhava-pratyaya, the samadhi of the causal cogni-
tion of being, accrues to the bodiless (videhas) and to the prakrti-
dissolved (prakrti-layas).]

Vyasa’s Commentary

Now this samadhi is indeed of two kinds:

*upaya-pratyaya: the causal cognition of which develops from

method

«bhava-pratyaya: the causal cognition of which develops into the

continuity of worldly being and at (re)birth

Of these, upa@ya-pratyaya accrues to the yogis, and
{Satra‘] bhava-pratyaya accrues to the bodiless (videhas) and to
the prakrti-dissolved (prakrti-layas).

Bhava-pratyay.a samadhi is (the experience) of the bodiless shin-
ing gods (videha devas). Their mind-field using only its samsk4ras,
they experience what only appears to be the state of absolute
isolation (kaivalya). They carry over the same kind of maturation
and fruition (vipa@ka) of the sarnskaras.

Similarly when the mind-field is still active in its domain and is
merged into prakrti, the prakrti-layas experience what only appears
SUTRA I19 257
like the state of absolute isolation (kaivalya), and then only until
the mind, active in its domain, returns again (into re-incarnation).

Discussion

The state of the videhas and the prakrti-layas was discussed in
Siitras 1.15 and 1.17. In this stitra we encounter a very special
problem. The siitra follows the one on the acognitive (asampraj-
Aidta) samadhi, which has been described as

enirodha-samadhi: the samadhi of total control and final cessa-

tion of vrttis, and

enir-bija: seedless, so that the sarhskaras can no longer produce

kleshas, karmas, and their fruition.
Yet Sitra I.19 appears to indicate that the seedless final samadhi
of the last siitra is further subdivided into

« upaya-pratyaya of the true yogis, and

« bhava-pratyaya of the videhas and prakrti-layas.

However, bhava-pratyaya samadhi described by Vyasa does not
match the descriptions of the seedless, acognitive, nirodha-samadhi.
A second look at the definitions and explanations already presented
on the videhas and prakrti-layas clearly shows that

+ the videhas stop at Gnanda-accompanied samadhi, and

+ the prakrti-layas stop at asmitd-accompanied samadhi.

It is not possible that the samadhi of videhas and prakrti-layas
could be a division of asamprajfdta, yet with the exception of BR
and AD all the commentators have considered updya-pratyaya and
bhava-pratyaya to be so. It is inconceivable that a yogi: who has
already reached asamprajnata now needs to develop the methods
(up@yas) to be described in Sitra 1.20. It is further inconceivable
that one in asamprajfdta still has the mind active in its domain,
causing re-incarnation! It 1s obvious that these commentators have
failed to establish proper connection among the sitras:
258 SUTRA II19

Siitra 17 describes samprajfiata samadhi.

Sitra 18 points out that there is another (anyah) samadhi (asam-

prajriata).

Siitras 19-50 continue on the topic of samprajfidta with intermit-

tent secondary references to asamprajfidta where relevant.
Siitra 51 finally returns to the topic of asamprajfiata.
In other words, Siitras 17 and 18 list the two kinds of samadhi.
Then the following siitra explains the first one on the list, sampra-
jfiata. Only when that one has been explained is the second one
dealt with, in Siitra 20. The commentators have erroneously applied
Sitra 19 to qualifying the second topic on the list. Only BR and
AD imply that Siitra 19 follows 17. BR says:

Videhas and prakrti-layas have been explained in the sitra dealing

with vitarka and so forth. Their samadhi is bhava-pratyaya, a

samadhi the causal cognition of which is of the worldly being

(bhava) of samsara. They are yet confined to worldly power

(adhimatra) in the cycle of sarmsara. They are qualified to attain

only a samadhi of a like kind. Because they are unable to see the

supreme reality, this samadhi of theirs is merely a semblance of

yoga. Therefore, one who seeks liberation should with great exer-

tion strive for the knowledge of the supreme reality and cultivate

it in meditation.
This indeed is the true intent of Patafijali and Vyasa. All the
commentators excepting BR and AD have produced confused ar-
guments trying to fit upadya-pratyaya and bhava-pratyaya samadhis
into asamprajfiata. They all in one way or another confirm espe-
cially bhava-pratyaya not to be yoga proper. It is not necessary to
present their divergent views, and only a summary of what is ac-
ceptable in the light of what has been established above will be
given.

Right from the beginning of one’s practice one needs to avoid
erroneous philosophical views such as those that fall into the cate-
gory of vikalpa (Sitra 1.9) and confusion of philosophies (bhranti-
darshana) (Sitra 1.30); otherwise one is prone to fall into philo-
sophicale complacencies (tushtis) (see TSS 15), which are elabo-
rated by NTC as follows:
SOTRA 119 259

- Everything happens from nature or matter (prakrti), and if only I
realize all the modes of its evolution, I will be liberated.

«The householders cannot attain liberation; renunciation by be-
coming a monk will give me liberation.

- Everything happens in its own time; thus time will give me lib-
eration.

«Everything is predestined; Ill be liberated when it is my destiny
to be so.

When one holds such erroneous views from the very beginning, the
ground is laid for stopping one’s spiritual practice at the state of
videhas and prakrti-layas.

The Videhas

The word videha means “bodiless,” that is to say:

«While yet embodied, the videhas have eliminated identification
with all evolutes—from the five gross elements that constitute the
physical body, up to aharhkara.

« When they depart from the body, they remain bodiless, achieving
the status of videha devas: ‘the bodiless shining ones’.

As was seen in Sittras 1.15 and 1.17, the status of videha accrues
only upon reaching the @nanda-accompanied samadhi. Here the
siddhis of the subtle worlds made up of the six a-visheshas are
mastered. When one conquers a higher peak, it is understood that
one has climbed the lower peaks also. The videhas are not merely
masters of aharnkara and the rapture of the third samprajfdata:
they have under their command the lower pleasures also. Without
needing a physical body the videhas may yet control all (a) gross
and subtle elements, (5) senses and their powers, (c) subtle celestial
essences of fragrances, etc., and, of course, (d) ahamk4ra. In the
subtle worlds they become masters of the rapturous and ecstatic
pleasures of celestial fragrances, flavours, sights, forms, lights and
visions, tactile sensations and incomparable music.

We can explain bhava-pratyaya in five ways:

I. The cause of the videhas’ cognition of these rapturous condi-
tions is their continued involvement with bhava, the existence
260 SOTRAII9
limited to evolutes of prakrti which maintain samsdra.
2. Their actual experience is also not spiritual but of bhava,
delimited material existence.
3. The result of this cognition is their continued involvement in
the sarnsara cycle. They are reborn after a time.
4. Upon birth they naturally remember the samadhi they had
already attained.
5. But they are still bound to ignorance (avidya) as both the
cause and the content of worldly continuity (bhava).
All of these five explanations are implicit in the compound phrase
bhava-pratyaya.
Vyasa says:
Now this samadhi is indeed of two kinds:
+ updya-pratyaya: the causal cognition of which develops from
method
« bhava-pratyaya: the causal cognition of which develops into
the continuity of worldly being and at (re)birth
Thus, samadhi may be attained in two ways:
1. By the practice of a method.
2. By birth as a result of samskaras continuing from previous
lives.
Further, Vyasa says:
Of these, Zpaya-pratyaya accrues to the yogis, and

[Sdatra:] bhava-pratyaya accrues to the bodiless (videhas) and

to the prakrti-dissolved (prakrti-layas).

Bhava-pratyaya samadhi is (the experience) of the bodiless
shining gods (videha devas) Their mind-field using only its sam-
skaras, they experience what only appears to be the state of
absolute isolation (kaivalya) They carry over the same kind of
maturation and fruition (vipadka) of the sarnskaras.

Samadhi gained by the observance of method is the subject of the
next sitra. Here the concern 1s with the videhas and prakrti-layas,
SOTRAI19 261
whose samadhi is bhava-pratyaya. The mind of the videhas is not
occupied with external objects but uses past sarhskadras. This is
implicit in the phrase sva-samskdara-matra-upayoga.

Some readings of the text change upayoga to upabhoga, which
expresses that such yogis enjoy only their sarhskdras. In such a
mind involved with past sarnskaras, the fresh sarnskaras formed
are those of the samadhi of one-pointed concentration. Their con-
centration on these objects continues to bind them and produces
like sarnskaras. Here the fact of the pacification of other vrttis
constitutes the experience of samadhi. The fact that unmatured
sarnskaras are still active keeps such yogis from the purest samadhi.
Because of the rapture of their experience and the vast time scales
of their subtle, celestial plane of existence, they think they have
reached absolute isolation (kaivalya), which is the true goal of
yoga. Because samskdras of the elements, senses and subtle, rap-
turous enjoyments keep becoming stronger, they need to go through
the death process and attain the state of devas, celestial shining
ones or angelic beings without physical bodies composed of gross
elements. While in that celestial station they continue to maintain
mastery over the world of subtle senses and enjoy the rapturous
experiences of subtle, celestial fragrances; flavours; forms, visions
and lights; tactile sensations; sounds and music; and the works of
ego and cosmic power

However benevolent, they are delimited and not one with the
infinite. Vyasa uses the verb ati-vdhayanti ‘they carry over’. It
suggests that these yogis maintain their @tivahika Shariras, their
subtle bodies, as vehicles of migration in which the sarnskaras
continue to be maintained. It 1s the force of these sarnskdras that
determines the mode and the place of their rebirth (country, parent-
age, condition, and so forth). No matter under which condition
they are born, they do not have to make an effort to learn the ways
of samadhi. What they had already attained comes naturally to
them, but since theirs was not a seedless (mr-bija) samadhi, they
must bear the fruition of the remaining sarnskaras (per YS 11.13)
while progressing further on the path of samadhi.
262 SOTRA 119
The Prakrti-Layas

Vyasa says:

Similarly when the mind-field is still active in its domain and is

merged into prakyti, the prakrti-layas experience what only ap-

pears like the state of absolute isolation (kaivalya), and then only

until the mind, active in its domain, returns again (into re-incar-

nation).
The mind of the prakrti-layas is still active in its domain, continu-
ing with its adhikara (which was discussed under Sitra I.5). The
prakrti-layas have accomplished asmita-accompanied samadhi. The
chitta in its mahat or buddhi aspect has reached the finest evolute
and has touched prakyti. There appears to be nothing further to
attain at this point. The sadhaka does not realize, without a guru,
that this actually is not the end. The constituents of the material
personality have been dissolved into their causes, but at this point
the direction of meditation changes. There are no objects. The
spiritual self must now turn towards itself. However, if this direction
does not become clear and the proper guidance is not available or
accepted, the yogi takes this point to be the end. His mind-field
touches unconscious prakrti. It finds an absence of consciousness
there, reaching the samadhi of the unconscious (jada-samadhi).
Just as the awareness had progressively identified itself with the
various evolutes, it now identifies with prakrti. All the other vrttis
have been eliminated, but avidyd is not yet conquered. These yogis
dwell in the causal body (liga sharira), which consists of mahat
alone.

While the videhas control various evolutes in the cosmos, prakrti-
layas are beyond that cosmic consciousness. They are involved
only with unevolved prakrti, from which (like the sage Vighvamitra)
they may create their own universes over which they are as Brahma,
the creator, with devas under their control. However, this state of
godhood is yet not supreme consciousness. Their ignorance is still
a type of viparyaya (Sitra 1.8), and they still need to purify them-
selves beyond the desire to control prakysti and to create universes.
The cosmic ego must also be dissolved. To do this they must again
SOTRA 1.19 263
incarnate as human beings and practise asamprajfata samadhi.
Upon rebirth they also, like the videhas, remember the practice of
samadhi and can proceed to asamprajfiata.

Both the videhas and prakrti-layas—sometimes together referred
to as “the shining ones bound to action (karma-devas)”—are called
taushtikas in the Sankhya system. They have experienced tushfi, a
feeling of satisfaction while yet short of the goal. (For details see
TSS 15 and Sankhya-karika 47, 50.) Neither the prakrti-laya nor
the videha is considered to be a yogi proper by Vyasa. Only those
who go into asamprajfiata are to be considered true yogis.

How long do these videhas and prakyti-layas remain in their
particular station? We paraphrase the answer (VM, VB) from
Vayu-purana:

«Those who have become masters of concentration on the senses
dwell at their station as videhas for the duration of ten Manu-
intervals, the masters of elements for a hundred, and the masters
of ego for a full thousand.

« Those who have mastered buddhi dwell there free of fever for ten
thousand Manu-intervals, and those who contemplate the un-
manifest prakrti stay for a hundred thousand. After reaching
purusha, who is beyond the gunas, there is no further measure of
time.

The commentators suggest that the order of siitras here follows
the maxim of the needle and the cauldron. If one has to clean
both, it is expedient to take first the smaller and easier object, the
needle, and then go on to cleaning the cauldron. The sitra on
bhava-pratyaya came first, by that maxim, and now we come to
the siitra on upaya-pratyaya samadhi.
264 SOTRA 1.20

Sitral20 «6 wardrdeqtvanfawarade gatara
Shraddha-virya-smyti-samadhi-prajfia-pirvaka
itaresham

Shraddha-: faith
virya-: strength
smrti-: mindfulness, memory, remembrance, intentness or presence

of mind

samadhi-: meditation
prajfa-: awakening of wisdom, samprajfiata
Purvakah: preceded by, having them as a precondition or prereq-

uisite

itaresham: of others

The samadhi of (some) others has as its preconditions faith,

strength, intentness, meditation and the awakening of wisdom in

samprajfiata.
Vyasa’s Commentary

Samadhi, the causal cognition of which is cultivated through

method (upa@ya-pratyaya), accrues to the yogis.

» Faith (Shraddha) means full clarity and pleasantness of the mind-
field. Benevolent like a mother, she protects the yogl.

«When that yogi holds to faith and seeks discriminating wisdom
(viveka), strength (virya) gathers in him.

- As strength gathers in him, intentness attends upon him.

«At the presence of intentness the mind, free of disturbance, be-
comes harmonized and established in samadhi.

+ When the yogi’s mind-field has become harmonized and estab-
lished in samadhi, the discrimination from awakening wisdom
(prajfid-viveka) appears, and one then knows the exact reality
(vathartham vastu).

By the practice (abhydsa) of that and through dispassion (vairagya)
concerning it, the asamprajfidta samadhi occurs.
SOTRA 1.20 265
Discussion

In introducing Siitra 19 Vyasa said that samadhi is attained in
two ways: by birth, as continuity from previous lives; and by prac-
tice of a method. The videhas and prakrti-layas are rejected as
unworthy of being included among the yogis until, upon rebirth,
they practise the method to its ultimate conclusion, the asampra-
jfdta samadhi. To reassert that only those who allow the method
to lead them up to asamprajfiata are true yogis, Vy4sa says:

Samadhi, the causal cognition of which is cultivated through

method (updya-pratyaya), accrues to the yogis.
As we read on, we find that the method (updya) does not mean
merely the techniques of concentration but also attitudes of mind
and the philosophy of life expressed in words like “faith (Shrad-
dha),” “strength (virya),” “intentness (smrti),” and so forth. This is
the path (SS) for one desiring liberation (mumukshu). It is the
path of the fivefold means shown in this siitra.

The question arises (VM, HA, RY): Since those who follow the
path up to becoming videhas and prakrti-layas also do so by having
faith, then why is it included only among the methods for those
who pursue the updya-pratyaya? The answer is in the way Shraddha
is to be defined. It was partly explained in Sitra I.14, but here it
will be explained further. It is said that (RS)

having Shraddhd as his wealth, one would see the self by the self.
This imples that Shraddha is faith in the fact that one has chosen
the way of self-realization (RS). This is a particular mutation (pari-
nama) of the mind (RS). Vyasa says:

Faith (Shraddha) means full clarity and pleasantness of the mind-

field.
This clarity and pleasantness is called prasada, discussed earlier in
Stra 1.16. It arises when (VM) the mind begins to feel an interest
266 SUTRA 120
in and attraction towards knowledge of true reality through
dgama: tradition and scriptural authority that one accepts,
anumana: rational processes one applies, and
upadesha: the teaching of one’s guru.
It is the happy and pleasant feeling that comes with the intention
to achieve discernment (viveka) (HA). It is a sattvic quality (RY).
It is an enthusiasm (BD) and a pleasant-mindedness and feeling of
love (priti) with which one feels the desire, “May I attain yoga”
(VB). Such prasa@da comes from G@stika-buddhi, an attitude of affir-
mation (NB) and recognition that “This yoga I undertake is indeed
the way to the highest purpose of being” (SS). Such an attitude or
view often arises by hearing of its eminence, as, for example:
The yogi is greater than the ascetic, greater than those on the
path of knowledge, even greater than the ones involved in action.
Therefore become a yogi, O Arjuna.
Bhagavad-gita V1.46
Shraddha is a feminine word, expressive of a gentle quality, asso-
ciated with humility and*reverence, and not overassertiveness or
fanaticism. Vy4sa says:
Benevolent like a mother, she protects the yogi.
She is a capable and strong (samartha) mother (VB, NB), who
protects the yogi from the possible calamity of falling onto the
wrong path (VM) and from becoming attracted to allurements of
pleasure (NB). She crushes the power of a thousand impediments
(NB, VB) so that no breach in the process of yoga may occur (VB).
Such is not the shraddha of those who have wavered and gone
off the path to become videhas and prakrti-layas. Even though
they may have started off with a certain strength of faith and all
the rest, they have weakened and turned away from unwavering
pursuit of self-realization. This shraddha, the will to attain the
final objective (VM), produces endeavour, maturing in a certain
virility and vigour (virya). Says Vyasa:
SOTRA 120 267
When that yogi holds to faith and seeks discriminating wisdom
(viveka), strength (virya) gathers in him.
One becomes enthusiastic (SS), puts forth effort (RY), does not
quit, and maintains firmness (NB) in his practice of yoga as he
seeks knowledge of the reality of either the individual self (jiva) or
God (ighvara) (VM). He consequently develops the capability to
guide his students (RS). He endures.

It will be seen later that virya means “the capacity to initiate,”
and does not develop without the practice of celibacy. The word is
related to the Latin vir ‘a man’, to the Sanskrit words vira ‘a brave
hero’ and virya ‘the seminal strength of a celibate’, and also to the
English word “virility.” Virya will be discussed further in Siitra
11.38, which says:

Through the practice of celibacy one gains virya.
There the commentators define virya (inter alia) as “the capacity to
initiate.” This virya produces smrti. We have translated the word
smrti as “intentness” in Vy4sa’s sentence:

As strength (virya) gathers in him, intentness (smrti) attends upon

him.
The word 1s derived from smr ‘to remember’ and its conventional
meaning is “memory.” In the context of yoga it is seldom common
memory, but rather memory in the way Arjuna, the hero of the
Bhagavad-gita, uses the term when he says:

I have gained memory

Bhagava:-gita XVIII 73

Upanishad- Brahma-yogin explains this statement to mean:

I have gained the recollection of my true nature that I am Brah-

man.
268 SOTRA 1.20

The YS commentators say smrti means contemplation (RS) or
meditation (dhyana) (VM, VB, NB, RY) to which one has been led
by virya, the endeavour with regard to the eight arigas of yoga (YS
I1.29ff.). It is the awakening of one-pointedness (BD). According
to HA, it means that one is always mindful, aware.

The fivefold method of this siitra is identical to the Buddhist
tradition of cultivating five strengths (indriyas), among which
smrti—sati in Pali—is the most important. Practising mindfulness
(sati-patthana) of

body: kdya,

emotions: vedand,

mind: chitta, and

conditions: dhamma,
as well as cultivating repeated awareness (anu-smrti—anussati in
Pali), which includes the paramount

Gna@pana-sati: mindfulness of exhalation and inhalation,
is perhaps the most central part of Buddhist meditation practice.
Thus it appears that the true meaning of the word smrti as it
occurs in this siitra is preserved in the Buddhist practice of sati-
patthana, a mindfulness that is maintained not only on one’s medi-
tation seat but throughout daily endeavours. This practice of con-
stant mindfulness is taught universally by the yogis of the Hima-
layas, irrespective of their affiliations. There 1s no doubt, therefore,
that smrti in this sitra is not ordinary memory, remembrance or
recollection, but rather the practice of remaining intent upon self-
observation, such as being mindful of breathing. In the next sen-
tence, Vyasa’s phrase smrti-upasthana is identical to the Buddhist
Pali phrase sati-patthana.

Vyasa says:

At the presence of intentness the mind, free of disturbance, be-

comes harmonized and established in samadhi.
SOTRA 1.20 269
We have translated srti-upasthadna as “the presence of intentness.”
No commentator has anything more to say about it. An-akula
‘free of disturbance’ means that the mind rises from the vikshipta
state (see p. 83) to the higher ground of one-pointedness (NBB).
“Becomes harmonized and established in samadhi” is expressed in
the original by one word: sam-d-dhiyate. It means that the mind
becomes free of polarities and conflicts. At this point there is a
convergence of the method of shraddha, virya, smrti, and so forth,
with that of the eight avigas of yoga (YS 11.29ff.) that begin with
restraints (yamas) (VM, HA, RS, VB, RY), without which no
samadhi is possible (VM). The fivefold method is clearly sup-
portive of the eight limbs even at the smrti stage, which might
mean mindfulness of the practice of yamas, etc., (SS) which finally
leads to samadhi. When one orders a servant to go shopping,
arrangement for a necessary vehicle is automatically implied (RS)—
this is a common analogy in Sanskrit texts. Since no samadhi is
possible without the yamas, etc., the siitra implies their practice in
mentioning samadhi.

With the convergence of updyas and angas, realization of the
objects of concentration occurs as discussed in Sitra I.17. Since
the word samprajfiata includes wisdom (prajfia), it is obvious that
this sitra separates the actual practice of samadhi or concentration
from the resulting wisdom (prajfia). According to Vyasa:

When the yogi’s mind-field has become harmonized and estab-
lished in samadhi, the discrimination from awakening wisdom
(prajfid-viveka) appears, and one then knows the exact reality
(vathartham vastu).
According to BR, the yogi then realizes the nature of the object of
his bhavand (see Sitra 1.17, p. 220). This realization must first be
effected. Then, as concentration grows, the separateness of the
evolutes from the spiritual self (jiva) or ishvara is seen (VM, VB,
RY). Knowing the exact reality, then, means that

einitially the nature of the objects of concentration is realized,

ethen viveka-khyati occurs, and

«that leads to dharma-megha samadhi.
270 SOTRA 1.20
Vyasa Nes
By the practice of that and through dispassion (vairagya) con-
cerning it, the asamprajfidta samadhi occurs.
From Shraddhd to prajfia are the means (updyas) for attaining
samprajfata samadhi and its resulting wisdom. When one develops
dispassion even towards this knowledge, as in YS 1.16, asampra-
Jjfiata samadhi ensues. Samprajfiata, then, serves as the updya for
asamprajfiata.
SOTRAI21 271
Sitral.21 « dtwdarrararerst:
tivra-sarhveganam dsannah
tivra-: acute, intense, fast, speedy
samveganam: of those with vehemence, speed, velocity, force,
momentum, progress
Gsannah: near, very close, impending, imminent
For those whose rate of progress is fast and whose momentum
is great, samadhi is very near and even imminent.
Vyasa’s Commentary
There are indeed nine kinds of yogis by virtue of the fact that
their observance of the methods (updyas) is mild, medium or in-
tense. So that there are:
mrdu-updya: those of mild updya
madhya-updya: those of medium updya
tivra-upaya: those of intense upaya
Among these, again, those of mild updya are divided threefold:
mrdu-sarhvega: those of mild progress
madhya-samvega: those of medium progress
tivra-samvega: those of speedy progress
Those of the medium updya and intense updya (are divided three-
fold) similarly. Among these, for those whose updya is intense,
[Satra:] whose rate of progress is fast and whose momentum is
great,
the attainment of samadhi as well as the fruit of samadhi
is very near and even imminent.
272 SUTRA 1.21
Discussion
If shraddhd, etc. are the normal methods (updyas), then samadhi
and its fruits should accrue equally to everyone who undertakes to
travel on the path of yoga (VM); but it is seen that some succeed,
some fail, some take a very long time, some yet longer, while some
others attain very quickly. It is stated (RS):
Of all the yogis whose inner self is intent on me, the one who
devotes himself to me with Shraddha is the one most favoured by
me.
Bhagavaa-gita V1.47
No one who takes to the blessed way suffers misfortune.
Bhagavad-gita V1.40
Thus we are assured that anyone actually undertaking the obser-
vance of Shraddha, etc. is bound to reach the final goal. Yet we are
told that success does not attend upon everyone equally. Some
have to pass through many lifetimes.
One who has not completed yoga in this life, a yoga-bhrashta, is
born in the home of the pure ones endowed by grace.
Bhagavaa-gita V1.41
At the end of many births the knowing one reaches me.
Bhagavaa-gita V11.19
This sitra explains the way of progress. Vydsa’s introdution to the
siitra can be summarized. These are the nine grades of yogis: those
of
mild upaya and mild momentum,
mild upaya and medium momentum,
mild up@ya and great momentum,
medium updya and mild momentum,
medium updya and medium momentum,
medium updaya and great momentum,
intense upaya and mild momentum,
intense updya and medium momentum,
intense upadya and great momentum.
SUTRA 1.21 73

Many practitioners are impatient and anxious concerning the
rate of their progress. One’s rate of progress is dependent upon the
intensity of one’s upadya and the degree of one’s momentum (sam-
vega). The updyas were explained in the last siitra. Their strength
in a person depends on the past sarhnskaras (VM). The commen-
tators have not explained what constitutes that strength in the
varying degrees of mildness or intensity. If one has practised the
upayas in past lives, he is capable of undertaking advanced prac-
tices in depth with a certain intensity. For example, if one has
practised the smrti updya of breath awareness in past lives, when
he begins the practice in this life,

he will naturally sit steady and for a prolonged period,

his awareness of the breath will be uninterrupted and

the breath will flow smooth and fine,

leading to a higher awareness.
That being the case, he can be taught a higher method of breath
awareness, which a person of mild updya is not qualified to receive.
A person of mild upaya cannot undertake his practice for any
extended length of time:

«his body is an obstacle,

«his mind 1s interrupted by extraneous thoughts and emotions,

«the excuses of worldly duties cause him vyutth@na—he must get

up,

. he does not reach the depths of awareness.

This brings us to samvega. VM and RY consider this word to
mean the strength and the degree of varradgya. No other commen-
tators have explained it this way. No doubt a person’s rate of
progress and momentum do depend on his degree of vairagya.
However, the derivative meaning of the word samvega includes
vehemence, speed, velocity, force, momentum, rate of progress. By
implication it means a strong sarhskdra from the past (BR) and a
strong (HA) ichchha—desire and will—to make fast progress. BG
considers this to include the fact that the practice remains uninter-
rupted. The importance of this has been explained in Sitra 1.14.
274 SOTRA 121
All the commentators are agreed that both the intensity of the

updya and the momentum of progress deyend on the accumulated
samnskaras from past lives (VM, VB, RS, NB, RY), and when the
strength of updya and samvega reaches its peak, samadhi is immi-
nent. Vy4sa says that this includes

the attainment of samadhi as well as the fruit of samadhi,
that is, (VM) samprajfiata and its fruit, asamprajfata. The fruit of
asamprajfiata (VM, VB) is kaivalya, as it is said:

One who has attained samadhi gains moksha in that very life.

Vishnu-purana V1.7.35
SUTRA 1.22 275
Satral.22 q?eneafearreard aarst Frere:
mrdu-madhyadhimatratvat tato’pi visheshah
mrdu-: mild, slow
madhya-: medium
adhimatra-: extreme, ultimate
(mrdu-madhya-adhimdatratvat): because there exists a division of
slow, medium and ultimate
tatah: from that
api: even, also
viSheshah: distinction
Even from among those of great momentum there is a distinction
of the slow, medium and ultimate.
Vyisa’s Commentary
Even from among those (of great momentum described in Sitra
1.21) there is a distinction of those with
e mild intensity,
¢ medium intensity and
¢ ultimate intensity.
With this distinction
« the attainment of samadhi and
e the fruit of samadhi
are
«imminent for those of mild intensity,
« more imminent for those of medium intensity, and
« most imminent for those of ultimate intensity and extreme updya.
Discussion
In the last siitra nine grades of yogis were described. Of these,
the last ones, those of intense upa@ya and great momentum, are
276 SOTRA 1.22

further subdivided here. At the ultimate stage the effort is most
intense (BR); the ground becomes completely firm; the mind be-
comes completely incapable of causing vyutthdna and simply dis-
solves (SS). The yogi then remains in the glory of the inward
conscious self without any interruption ever, and with no further
impediments.

The word api has two meanings: “even” and “also.” Translated
as “even,” it refers to those whose updyas and rates of progress
have been mentioned in Sitras 1.20 and 1.21. “Also” implies that
there is yet some other category of yogis to be considered: namely,
those who follow the methods to be mentioned in Siitras 1.23 and
1.33-39. This especially includes yogis who are at the ultimate stage
of receiving the grace of God as in Sitra I.23 (VB, NB). In other
words, the subdivisions established in this Siitra 1.22 apply to yogis
who practise methods propounded in all these siitras: 1.20,21,23
and 33-39,
SOTRA 1.23 277
Siiral.23  §xaeafrararg ari
ishvara-pranidhanad va
ishvara-: God’s
pranidhanat: by practising the presence
va: or

Or, samadhi can be attained quickly! through practising the

presence of God.

Vyasa’s Commentary

Does samadhi become imminent by this fivefold method (updya)
alone? Now, is there some other way (updya) for its attainment or
not?

The practice of the presence of God (pranidhdna) is a specific
form of devotion (bhakti-vishesha). Through this practice God is
won over and turns towards the yogi, and when the yogi merely
directs his thought (abhi-dhyana) towards Him, He favours him
with grace.

Also, merely by the yogi’s turning his thought towards Him, his
attainment of samadhi as well as the fruit of samadhi becomes
closer, imminent (@sannatara).

Discussion

Is (HA) the samadhi for the attainment of wisdom (sampra-
Jfata) concerning the

«objects of apprehension (gra@hya),

«instruments of apprehension (grahana) and

«the agent of apprehension (grahitr)
imminent only by these methods of shraddha, etc., and only through
the extreme practice of these with great momentum? No; another
19 The word a@sannah is brought down to this sitra from Sitra 1 21 by way of anu-vriti (see
Stra 110, p 178)
278 SUTRA 1.23
way is by practising the presence of God (iShvara-pranidhdana).
IShvara-pranidhana in this sitra is not to be confused syjth the
definition of the term to be given in YS II.1. Here it means dh@rana,
dhyana and samd@dhi with regard to the practice as taught in Sitra
1.28 (BG, NB), the result of which is stated in Sitra 1.29) If one
does not read the present siitra in light of Siitras 1.28 and 29 but
looks at it by itself, he would correctly see that its intent is to state
that the grace of God when invoked by a true devotee leads to
samadhi. But he would also mistakenly think that faith, etc. are of
no consequence. The real intent is that samadhi through the grace
of God is within reach of yogis of the ninth category, those of
intense upaya and great momentum (Sitra 1.21), who are further
subdivided in Siitra 1.22. To reach that grade of intensity, one does
need to practise the five updyas. However, the siitra does not
present a choice between the five updyas and the practice of the
presence of God. Lest the word “or” (va) in this siitra give the
impression of a choice, it has been preempted by the word “also”
(api) in the preceding siitra (see p. 276). The practice of the pre-
sence of God needs to start right from the beginning as part of
faith (Shraddha) and continue to develop. When all of these to-
gether reach a certain peak of intensity, all other practices may be
dropped, and at the last stage God’s grace alone suffices to help
the yogi reach the final samadhi.

The Yoga-sitras’ definition of God follows in the next sitra.
Some commentators (BG, NB) prefer to state that iShvara is the
Supreme Self (parama-dtman), bearing appellations such as “Brah-
man.” According to BG, ishvara is the non-qualified pure con-
sciousness. According to NB, ishvara is the special purusha who is
pure consciousness, identical to the qualified Brahman. These dis~-
cussions have no bearing on the theory of the Yoga-sitras, which
do not concern themselves with the transcendental nature of Brah-
man. The Yoga-sutras’ main concern is the kaivalya of the one
who is in ignorance and in suffering. Because the nature of the
transcendent most likely will become known to the individual pu-
rusha only after kaivalya has been attained, one should not concern
SOTRA 1.23 279
oneself too much with this type of controversy concerning the
nature of God.

According to VB and NB, samprajfiata samadhi leading to the
knowledge of the individual self (jiva-4tman) then leads to asam-
prajfiata through perfection of the updyas like Shraddha, whereas a
yogi reaches asamprajfiata of the Supreme Self even without those
upayas. It is thus (VM, NB) that all the textual traditions insist
that liberation (moksha) is attained through knowledge of Brah-
man.

For those who do not believe in God and cannot practise His
presence or surrender to His will, it has been seen that the path of
upayas is available, in which the definition of Shraddha incorpor-
ates no such requisite belief or surrender (see Siitra 1.20). For
those endowed with a high degree of intensity it is possible that the
practice of pranidhadna may serve as a shortcut so that the other
updayas present themselves on the journey without effort and serve
as secondary supports for the practice of the presence of God. This
also explains the difference between concentration on aspects of
God in sa-vitarka, etc. and ishvara-pranidhana itself.

Vyasa says:

The practice of the presence of God (pranidhdana) is a specific

form of devotion (bhakti-vishesha).
Pranidhana means “placing something near, in the proximity of;
putting something down.” /Shvara-pranidhana is to place oneself
down in all humility and egolessness in the proximity of God, to
dwell near and close to God, to surrender and place oneself at the
disposal of God even though one will not know the nature of God
tll after asamprajfata samadhi is reached. This devotion should be
(VM, RY) (1) mental, (2) vocal, and (3) physical.

This 1s the secret (NB) and easy path (NB, AD). It is (BR) to
reject all other desires of worldly pleasures and to offer all one’s
actions to Him who 1s the Supreme Guru (BR, RS). It 1s not
merely the surrender of an action after the fact but bh@vand (as
explained in Sitra I.17) before and during the acts also (HA).
280 SUTRA 1.23

While one practises this bhavand through daily acts, it also involves

another bhavana, that of cultivating the object of concentration in

meditation. Even though one does not know the nature of God
until after asamprajfdta samadhi has been perfected, one fills one-
self with love, invokes His presence and concentrates on Him in
the heart lotus, offering one’s entire self to Him without any other
concern or worry. A yogi does not limit this practice to his separate
meditation alone but applies it to his entire life. Such bhakti indeed
leads to samadhi. Vyasa says:

Through this practice God is won over and turns towards the

yogi, and when the yogi merely directs his thought (abhi-dhyana)

towards Him, He favours him with grace.

Also, merely by the yogi’s turning his thought towards Him,

his attainment of samadhi as well as the fruit of samadhi becomes

closer, imminent (@sannatara).

All the commentators prefer this passage to be translated thus:
Through this practice God is won over and turns towards the
yogi and, by His mere will and thought directed towards him,
graces him. By God’s mere will and thought directed towards
him, the yogi’s attainment of samadhi and the fruit of samadhi
becomes closer, imminent.

The commentators are correct here in explaining that abhi-dhyana

(will and thought directed towards Him) 1s a reciprocal process.

The yogi directs his thought towards God, who then directs His

grace towards the yogi, whereby the yogi receives God’s grace and

attains samadhi. The grace of realization may come by this alone,
without any other effort (VM). It is stated in the Upanishads (RS):

Whomsoever He chooses, by him 1s He to be found.

Unto him this Self of his own reveals His person

Mundaka Upanishad 11.2.3

Whosoever wins God over and thus becomes qualified is chosen by
God, who deems, “May he know Me.” By such a qualified one
(adhikarin) is God to be found. The devotee, a yogi, wins God’s
SOTRA 1.23 281
favour through that devotion (RS) which causes him to lovingly
think of God constantly (NB). God directs His will towards him—
“May his wish be fulfilled,” “May his desire be fulfilled” (VM, RY,
SS)—thus He graces the person who was burning on the embers of
worldly cycles (sarmsdra) (SS). Even if the devotee is unable to
follow the rules and observances because of physical illness, prob-
lems, impediments or any incapacity, God remains favourable to
him and wills that he may attain samadhi and moksha (VM, NB).

God often graces devotees by assuming an incarnate form,
nirmana-kaya, a Buddhist term used by SS for the historical, phy-
sical body of the Incarnate One. HA says God has promised in
many texts (as also stated by Vyasa in YS 1.25): “Throughout the
cycles of creations, dissolutions and great dissolutions through my
teaching of knowledge and virtue I shall deliver the purushas who
are transmigrating in samsdra.” And a quotation from Paficha-
Shikha (also given by Vyasa in YS 1.25) confirms: “The first wise
being, the illustrious supreme sage, directing a produced mind,
taught the tradition (tantra) out of compassion to Asuri, a seeker
after knowledge.” Thus God favours devotees by assuming a mirmdana-
chitta (see YS I1V.4), which is not a physically incarnate form but
an incarnation of God into an individual mind. This He does
through the Golden Womb (Hiranya-garbha), the first guru (Sutras
I.1 and 1.26). Thus God’s grace can descend in many different ways.
He may incarnate in a physical body or send His grace through the
Golden Womb or incarnate into an individual guru’s mind or into
the mind of the devotee himself. This is also the meaning of sur-
render to the guru. If one is unable to find the mental way of
surrender to God, he begins with surrender to the guru, who in
turn leads him to the Supreme Guru of whom Sitra 1.26 speaks.

Attainment of samadhi and the fruit of samadhi in Vyasa’s com-
mentary on this siitra are the same as in the preceding siitra. The
yogi gains samprajfata when he practises the presence of the incar-
nate form of the guru and God. The fruit thereof is asamprajfiadta
samadhi in the presence of the Supreme Being, whose grace 1s the
final liberation (moksha).

The following sitras will explain ifhvara-pranidhana further.
282 SUTRA 1.24
Sotral.24 «= - Ferav@rifrorararaearerqee:
qeafaere frat:
kleSha-karma-vipakaSshayair a-para-mrshtah
purusha-vishesha ishvarah
klesha-: afflictions
karma-: actions,
vipaka-: maturing, ripening, fruition of actions
@shayaih: with propensities, accumulations, domains
a-para-mrshtah: unsmeared
purusha-visheshah: a special purusha
ighvarah: God
A special purusha not smeared by afflictions, actions, their frui-
tions and the domains of their accumulated propensities is God.
Vyasa’s Commentary
Now, in addition to prakrti and purusha, who is this one named
God (iShvara)?
[Sitra:] A special purusha not smeared by afflictions, actions,
their fruitions and the domains of their accumulated propensities
is God.
The afflictions (k/eshas) are ignorance (avidya) and so forth. The
actions (karmas) are well or ill (kushala or a-kushala). Their fruit
isthe maturation (vipaka). The propensities of like nature are the
accumulations in their domain (@shaya). Though operative in the
mind, they are attributed to purusha as though he were the expe-
riencer of their fruits, as defeat or victory actually occurring to the
fighting warriors is attributed to the king. The one who is not
smeare@ by such experience of the results of actions (bhoga) 1s
God (ishvara), the special purusha.
There are many absolute entities?” who have attained,isolation
20 BB's translation of Aeva/e, the word literally means “one alone, one who has attained
Aavvalva, or isolation of self from matter *
SUTRA 1.24 283
(kaivalya). They attained kaivalya after rending the three bondages.
For God, however, there never was any connection with those
bondages nor will there ever be.

Though a liberated one’s preceding condition of bondage is
known, such is not the case with God. Similarly, though the way
the succeeding condition of bondage of one who has entered
prakrti-laya is known, such is not the case with God. He is indeed
always free (mukta), always the Lord (ishvara).

Does this perennial supremacy of the Lord (iShvara), which is
derived from the fact that in Him obtains the excellence of essence
and intelligence (sattva), have a purpose and a proof (nimitta) or
not? Its proof and purpose is the Law, the revealed teaching and
the scriptures (Sha@stra).

What is the purpose and the proof of the scriptures (Shastra)? Its
purpose and proof is the excellence of its essence and intelligence.
These—the Law, its teaching and the scriptures (Shdstra) on the
one hand and the supremacy on the other—subsisting in the essence
and intelligence of the Lord (iShvara), have a beginningless, mutual
relationship. That is why it is thus: always the Lord, always free
(mukta).

“This Lordship of His is without equality to another and without
being exceeded in excellence by another. It 1s not exceeded by
some other lordship. Whatever could be the unexceeded excellence,
that would be That Lordship. Therefore, wherever the Lordship
(aiShvarya) reaches its extremity, that 1s God (iShvara).

Nor is there a Lordship equal to His. Wherefore? If there were
two equals who had simultaneous intentions with regard to a certain
matter, one would say, “Let it happen in the new way,” and the
other would say, “Let it be in the old way,” and the wish of only
one of them would be fulfilled while thwarting the other’s power of
fulfilling a wish (prakamya); this would occasion the contingency
of one of the two “equal” ighvaras being the less. And between two
equals it is impossible to attain a simultaneous fulfilment of the
wish of both because they have contradictory purposes.

Therefore, whose Lordship 1s free of any other equal or someone
284 SUTRA 1.24
excelling, only He is the Lord (iShvara) and He is the special
Conscious Being (purusha-vishesha).

Discussion

This is a Jakshana-sitra, a siitra of definition, defining ighvara.
From the last siitra, where surrender to God is enjoined, a question
arises. The Sankhya-yoga system believes in two entities, the con-
scious purusha and the unconscious prakrti. If igshvara is uncon-
scious, He is prakrti; if He is conscious, He is no other than
purusha. If He is unconscious prakrti, how can He be won over? If
He is conscious purusha, or consciousness-force (chiti-shakti), being
neutral and unaffected, how can He be won over by any observance
(VM)? Obviously then, this igshvara is neither prakrti nor the entity
normally referred to as purusha. Hence Vyasa asks:

Now, in addition to prakyti and purusha, who is this one named
God (ighvara)?
The siitra provides the answer:
A special purusha not smeared by afflictions, actions, their frui-
tions and the domains of their accumulated propensities is God.
This definition is sufficient so far as the needs of the Yoga-siitras
are concerned.

Commentators like VB have used enormous amounts of space
trying to fit this definition of ishvara within the framework of the
Vedantic discussions of Brahman. We shall not try here to sum-
marize or reproduce VB’s discussion because it has no direct bear-
ing on the aims of the Sankhya-yoga system. The Sankhya system
gives a questioning human being an insight into the facts of his
ignorance, bondage and pain by defining its causes and explaining
the relationship between prakrti and purusha. In the oral tradition
(as taught by Swami Rama) the Yoga-sutras is a prayoga-shastra,
a text to teach a practical method by which purusha’s connec-
tion with prakrti may be sundered so that purusha may dwell in
his own nature and (as in the current siitra) so that a qualified
SOTRA 1.24 285
aspirant may receive the grace of God that leads to liberation. The
Yoga-siitras end with kaivalya; however, the nature of God as
experienced in kaivalya is definitely not a Yoga-siitras’ topic. It is
sufficient for the individual purusha in bondage to know that there
is a God who, unlike himself, is free of afflictions and whose grace
can help to liberate him. Where ishvara fits within the scheme of
Brahman and Its emanations is certainly not the topic of the Yoga-
sutras. Other texts, such as some of the Upanishads—especially
Katha, Mundaka, Mandiikya and Shvetdshvatara—as well as the
Bhagavad-gita and the Puranas, have with varying degrees of suc-
cess developed ways of fitting the Sankhya-yoga and Vedanta sys-
tems together.?!

Returning to the siitra proper, Vy4sa says:
The afflictions (k/eShas) are ignorance (avidy@) and so forth.
The word klesha (BR) is derived from the verb root lish, meaning
“to cause pain.” The k/eShas afflict and cause pain and are the five
(avidya and so forth) which were partly discussed as the five perver-
sive cognitions (HA) (viparyayas) in Sitra 1.8 and which will be
further enumerated in Sitra I].3. They afflict a purusha by attack-
ing him with all kinds of worldly sorrows (VM). Their attack
means only their attaching themselves to him (RS). Again, Vyasa:
The actions (karmas) are well or ill (Kushala or a-kushala).

The actions are virtue and vice (dharma and a-dharma) (VM, VB,
BG, NB, HA), those (BR) (a) enjoined and prescribed, (6) pro-
hibited and (c) mixed. Because they cause the well or the ill, they
are referred to as kuShala and a-kushala, respectively. The word
kushala normally means “wellness.” Even in the spoken language
one normally asks, “Are you kushala?”—that is, “Are you well?”
To be kushala 1s to be free of all 111 condition—physical, mental or
situational—to be a person whom no calamity or accident befalls.
21 The most commonly accepted arrangement of the combined Vedanta and Sankhya
categories has been charted and may be studied in the author’s work God (Honesdale, Pa.
Himalayan International Institute of Yoga Science and Philosophy, 1981)
286 SOTRA 1.24
Such a condition is not arrived at by chance or predestination but
as the result of one’s acts (karma) which cause the wellness or
illness. Therefore the word developed a secondary meaning: to be
skillful, an expert, proficient in any area. Thus, someone expert at
surgery is Shalya-kriya-kushala. Wellness in life requires an exper-
tise, a proficiency, in the exact science called life. Hence Bhagavad-
gita 11.50 states:

yogah karmasu kaushalam.

Yoga is skillfulness (KauShala) in actions (karmas).

Some commentators (e.g., HA) say that sarhskdras are included
in karmas here, but that would be redundant since ashaya, the
domain of karmas, is about to be mentioned. More about karmas
will be discussed in Sitras II.12-14, 11.22, 1V.2 and IV.6-9. Vyasa
says that

Their fruit is the maturation (vipdka).
The derivative meaning of the word vipaka is “ripening (like a
fruit).” The karmic seed ripens, comes to fruition and maturation.
The vipakas, accordingly, are (VB, VM, BR, BG, NB, RY, AD,
3S) (a) the species in which one 1s reborn (/@zi), (b) the life span
after the birch (4yus), and (c) the pleasant or painful experiences
(bhoga) during that life span. This will be discussed further in
conjunction with Sitra II.12. Vyasa says:

The propensities of like nature are the accumulations in their

domain
Or more literally:

The vasands of like qualities are the @shayas.
The vasands are the samskaras, imprints of actions left in the
mind, anu the propensities towards the like vipaka that develop in
the mind. The word a@shaya means “that which lies dormant” or
“that wnerein something lies dormant; a storehouse.” The vasands
SOTRA 1.24 287
lie dormant in the mind (VB, VM, RY) until the maturity of
karma (BR, AD); hence they are the a@shayas.

The presence of a sarhnskara in the mind begins to produce certain
mental tendencies, fantasies, thoughts, wishes, images and so forth
even before the maturity of a karma. Thus they provide a certain
momentum and propensity towards the external choices one makes.
These choices, apparently conscious but in fact the results of the
propensity from the dormant and unconscious @shaya, expose one
to the immediate external causes of maturation, which are then
credited with or blamed for one’s fortune or misfortune, wellness
or illness. As a matter of fact, in the propensities inhere the quali-
ties of past action and of the fruits that are to ripen in due time.
They may consist of tendencies towards knowledge (BG) or the
opposite. These are, like the vipaka, the vasands of (HA) the species
in which one will be born, the life span after that birth, and the
pleasures and pains during that life span.

These very vasands also produce the basic instincts. A human
being to be reborn as an elephant unconsciously begins to develop
certain mechanisms, momentum and propensities within the inter-
nal world of his dormant sarnskaras. When he is finally born as an
elephant, he already knows how to act towards, for instance, trees,
without which knowledge he would not be able to survive (RY).

The word dshaya is also translated as “the domain wherein some-
thing lies dormant.” The aspect of chitta in the subtle body, where
the sarhnskaras and vasands dwell, is their domain (@Shaya). Hence
the words

karmashaya: (karma + a@shaya),
wpakashaya_ (vipaéka + ashaya),
or as in this siitra, after parsing the euphony, karma-vipaka-aSshaya.

A question can be raised here: (VM) Since all these kleshas,
karmas and so forth are the attributes (dharmas) only of buddhi
and do not in any case smear the purusha, why 1s it that only the
special purusha named ishvara is mentioned as not being smeared
by them? Vyasa replies:
288 SUTRA 1.24

Though operative in the mind, they are attributed to purusha as

though he were the experiencer of their fruits, as defeat or victory

actually occurring to the fighting warriors is attributed to the

king.
It is not that purusha is truly the experiencer (bhoktr), but rather
that it is the source and cause of the mind’s awareness (chetayitr)
(VM). The experience (bhoga) simply means feeding chitta with
the sattva of the objects of experience and causing it to take on
like vrttis (VB). It is only for practical purposes (HA) that k/eshas,
etc. are attributed to purusha. When it is said “The king is victor-
ious” or “The man is wealthy,” these are not statements concerning
the actual person (VB). On YS II.19 Vyasa says:

Devadatta is becoming impoverished because his cattle are dying

out. Devadatta’s impoverishment is due to the death of his cows

but there is no actual loss in his own person.
Similarly, when we say that purusha is, for instance, happy, or
unhappy, or stupefied, these are not statements regarding purusha’s
own being at all. Thinking that there is any relationship of inher-
ence (samavdya-sambandha) between purusha and the experience
of happiness, etc. 1s indeed ignorance (avidya) (VB). Any attributing
of such qualifications is mere speculation for practical purposes.
Yet the individual jivas are considered as owners (sva@min) of their
individual buddhis and chittas and thereby also the owners of the
happy, unhappy or stupefied conditions and k/eshas, etc. that smear
the minds.

Then there is a special purusha, concerning whom even such

hypotheses for practical purposes are not possible. Vyasa says:

The one who 1s not smeared by such experience of the results of

actions (bhoga) is God (igshvara), the special purusha.
He 1s unique in that the qualifications and conditions of the buddhi
and chitta cannot be attributed to Him (VM, VB, BR, RY) in past,
present or future (BR, BG, NB, RY, HA). Even though the k/leshas,
etc. cannot touch Him, He may associate Himself with a nirmdana-
SOTRA 1.24 289
chitta, a mind-field specially created to serve as a vehicle of incar-
nation (HA). The word ishvara is derived from the verb root ish
‘to govern’, which includes the capacity to impart grace (see discus-
sion on p. 101, Sitra 1.2). He is able to save all the worlds simply
by His will (NB, BR); hence, “ighvara.” .

That His freedom from kleshas, etc. is not in any way subject to
time is emphasized in the next statement of Vyasa:

There are many absolute entities (kevalin) who have attained
isolation (kaivalya). They attained kaivalya after rending the three
bondages. For God, however, there never was any connection
with those bondages nor will there ever be.

The word kevalin used by Vyasa has been translated as “absolute
entities” for want of a better phrase. Those who attain kaivalya,
according to the Yoga-sitras’ definition, are called kaivalin and
not kevalin. Kevalin is a Jaina term. It appears that Vydsa is
challenging the view of the Jainas, who do not believe in a creator
God but do believe that those who reach the highest perfection
through yoga and are called kevalin become ighvaras after death.
In Vy4sa’s view, Patafijali’s definition of ishvara does not apply to
them.

VB recognizes that some Vyasa manuscripts have the reading
kaivalin, which means those who have attained kaivalya. He con-
siders Hiranya-garbha as an example of those who have attained
kaivalya, are leaders among the liberated ones and might possibly
qualify for the title “iShvara.” VB seems to regard Hiranya-garbha
as an historical personage who attained ka/valya. This mistaken
assumption will be refuted in the discussion on Sitra I.26.

In any case, neither the Jaina kevalins nor the kaivalins can be
considered equal to ishvara, on the ground that at one time, unlike
iShvara, they had to free themselves from the three kinds of bon-
dage. These three kinds of bondage (bandha) 1n the Sankhya system
are as follows:

« Prakrta (or prakrtika) bandha, by which one identifies the self

with prakrti or with any of its evolutes The prakrti-layas are at
the highest rung of the ladder of this bondage.
290 SUTRA 1.24

¢ Vaikrta (or vaikarika) bandha, by which one becomes attracted
to celestial pleasures, as do the videhas, or by which a renunciate
may be drawn to the ordinary, worldly attractions.

«Dakshina (or dakshinika) bandha, by which worldly
people remain involved with desires and hope for liberation
through ritual practices. Also included in this category of bon-
dage is the dependence of renunciates on the offerings of basic
necessities received from householders.

For God there was never any connection with such bondages nor
will there ever be. Vyasa continues:

Though a liberated one’s preceding condition of bondage is
known, such is not the case with God. Similarly, though the way
the succeeding condition of bondage of one who has entered
prakrti-laya is known, such is not the case with God. He 1s
indeed always free (mukta), always the Lord (ighvara).

At this point the fact of Lordship (aishvarya) is defined in various
ways. The Lord (ighvara) is endowed with a will that can never be
impeded and 1s always efficacious (VB). His Lordship refers to His
ability to save the entire world and all the worlds by mere will
(NB). This Lordship means to possess the supreme power of (VM,
RY, VB, NB) knowledge (jA#@na) and action (Kriya), which remains
even when the world 1s dissolved in pralaya (VB) and renders
possible the Lord’s capability as a saviour of the worlds (NB).
Again we read Vyasa:

Does this perennial supremacy of the Lord (ighvara), which 1s
derived from the fact that in Him obtains the excellence of essence
and intelligence (sattva), have a purpose and a proof (nimitta) or
not? Its proof and purpose is the Law, the revealed teaching and
the scriptures (Shastra)

What 1s the purpose and the proof of the scriptures (Shastra)?

Its purpose and proof is the excellence of its essence and intelh-
gence. These—the Law, its teaching and the scriptures (Shastra)
on the one hand and the supremacy on the other—subsisting in
the essence and intelligence of the Lord (ighvara), have a beginn-
ingless, mutual relationship. That is why it is thus: always the
Lord, always free (mukta). .
, SUTRA 1.24 291

The single word sattva has been translated as

« essence (that is, being) and

« intelligence (that is, knowing)
both as intertwined, one not subsisting without the other. The
word sattva in this sense is not to be confused with that sattva
which is a guna of prakrti, but rather refers to the very essence and
intelligence, being and knowing, which is an innate attribute of the
Lord.

The single word Shastra is translated here as (1) the eternal Law,
which is synonymous with God’s knowledge and the application of
which is manifest in the power of action (kriya-shakti), creativity,
by which the world comes into existence and is maintained within
the Law, (2) the revealed teaching, which is conveyed from the
Lord to the individual jiva so the latter may be raised and saved,
and (3) the scripture itself in that verbal form which is conveyed by
jiva to jiva, from teacher to disciple. The scripture in this tradition
is the Veda, as well as any knowledge passed on as revealed author-
ity (@gama pramana) (YS 1.7).

Vyasa means to say here that the purpose of the Lord’s essence
and knowledge is manifest in the fact that from His compassionate
grace He gives this knowledge to the jivas to help raise and liberate
them. The proof of this fact lies in the statements given in the
Vedas and by other revealed authorities. The purpose of the Vedas,
the other scriptures and revealed words is to lead the jiva to the knowl-
edge of God. God reveals the texts; the texts reveal God. Because
God reveals the scriptures, they are authoritative—and God is the
supreme authority because of scriptural testimony. One is the proof
of the other and vice versa. Even though this appears to be a
circular argument, the eternal relationship of God and His revela-
tion is a fundamental tenet of all traditional spiritual paths. When
one follows the steps prescribed by the Yoga-siitras, the truth of
the revealed statements is verified by individual experience.

It is fitting at this point to reread the last quotation from Vyasa
because all the commentators have interpreted the first paragraph
in a way different from Vydsa’s intention. This difference is based
292 SUTRA 1.24
on the term sattva, which in this case is properly translated as
“God’s own essence and intelligence.” All the other commentators
use the term to express the usual guna of prakrti. However, if
sSattva were to be read as a guna, Vydsa’s paragraph would be
translated as follows:
Does this perennial supremacy of the Lord, which is arising from
His taking up and holding to the excelling sattva, have a purpose
and proof or not?
This translation will not be challenged because it does not conflict
with our own interpretation. The Lord’s essence and intelligence
reaches out and touches the sattva of prakrti, which He knows
as His sva (own property), and over which now He acts as svamin
(owner).

The argument now develops further. It is understood that the
Lord is the saviour of all and that He cannot function as saviour
without the powers of knowledge and action (NB). But (VM, RY)
how can these powers become operative in the consciousness-force
(chiti-Shakti), which 1s stated to be immutable? It is answered (VM,
NB) thus: Out of compassion for the jivas the Lord, as it were,
reaches down and touches the pure sattva of prakrti, the power of
sattva excelling beyond the reach of rajas and tamas. The Lord
touches this sattva as it prevails in the chitta. The Lord thus asserts
His proprietorship over this aspect of prakrti. But unlike us, He
does not thereby become subject to avidya and bondage. He sees—
the texts do not say that He desires—He sees that

I shall raise these beings from the oceans of the sorrows of
rebirth and threefold pains.
I shall do so by revealing the true knowledge to them.
It is not possible to reveal the true knowledge without extend-
ing forth my preeminent power of knowledge and action.
I can extend it forth only by touching that pure sattva of the
chitta which is free of rajas and tamas.
Thus He touches the sattva without identifying with it, unlike the
ordinary jivas. One becomes ignorant (a-vidvan) only when he
SOTRA 1.24 293
identifies with that ignorance (avidyd) that is constituted of mistak-
ing the self for the non-self. One is not ignorant when he uses
avidya qua avidya, knowing it to be so. An actor representing a
hero on the stage does not become confused as to his own true
identity. The Lord, unlike the jiva, does not identify with avidya
on the stage of a sattva-dominated chitta. Thus His power of
knowledge and action continues to send His grace into the chitta
to liberate beings.

Another difficulty (VM, NB) arises here. Only by touching the
chitta can the Lord see that a being needs to be liberated. On the
other hand, it has just been stated that the Lord touches the chitta
in order to liberate it. The answer to this logical dilemma lies in
the fact that the relation of the Lord and prakrti is Shashvatika
(perennial), as Vyasa says. At the time of each dissolution of the
universe the Lord knows: “Even in the next cycle of creation shall
I similarly liberate beings” (see Sitra I.25 commentary). This com-
passion and grace is synonymous with the Lord’s powers (Shakti)
of knowledge and action. In such perennial relationship, the ques-
tion does not arise as to whether the compassion to liberate comes
before touching a chitta, or after.

Here it needs to be remembered that the cosmic chitta is the
instrument of that grace which flows from the Lord to the in-
dividual chitta of a jiva. In fact, the Yoga-sitras’ philosophy, in
contrast to that of Sankhya, recognizes only the cosmic chitta,
which, becoming operative in an individual personality, appears
individuated. Ishvara assumes the cosmic chitta to be His mind
wherewith to run the universe and to grace individual beings out of
compassion. Because ighvara is always the Lord and always free,
unlike individual jivas, there is no question of His falling into
ignorance and identifying Himself with the cosmic chitta. When
(NB) He takes hold of the sattva of prakrti, the universe is created,
and in touch with that sattva-chitta the Lord expresses His knowl-
edge and action. When the Lord takes hold of the tamas of
prakrti, the universe is dissolved and the Lord rests in his yoga
sleep (yoga-nidra). This perennial and perpetual cycle continues
294 SUTRA 1.24

because ishvara is forever and always the Lord and ever free.
Vyasa’s next three paragraphs are self-explanatory and need no

comment.

This Lordship of His is without equality to another and with-
out being exceeded in excellence by another. It is not exceeded
by some other Lordship. Whatever could be the unexceeded ex-
cellence, that would be That Lordship. Therefore, wherever the
Lordship (aishvarya) reaches its extremity, that is God (ighvara).

Nor is there a Lordship equal to His. Wherefore? If there were
two equals who had simultaneous intentions with regard to a
certain matter, one would say, “Let it happen in the new way,”
and the other would say, “Let it be in the old way,” and the wish
of only one of them would be fulfilled while thwarting the other’s
power of fulfilling a wish (prakdmya); this would occasion the
contingency of one of the two “equal” iShvaras being the less.
And between two equals it is impossible to attain a simultaneous
fulfilment of the wish of both because they have contradictory
purposes.

Therefore, whose Lordship is free of any other equal or some-
one excelling, only He is the Lord (iShvara) and He is the special
Conscious Being (purusha-vishesha).

The paragraphs establish that there is only one God. If there were
many Gods acting in concert, adds VM, none of them would be
ishvara, as in a committee no single person has the supreme power.
On the other hand, in a battle of wills between two hypothetical
Gods, the one whose will is proved to be paramount will emerge as
that one iShvara. Beyond the extreme preeminence of Lordship
there can be no other God. By practising the presence of that one
God and surrendering all mental, vocal and physical acts to His
will, one receives the ever-flowing grace, enters samadhi and is
liberated.
SUTRA 1.25 295
Sitral25 «wa fretradt aderdtaa
tatra nir-atishayam sarvajfia-bijam
tatra: there, in that (God)
nir-atishayamm: ultimate, not exceeded (by any other), unexcelled
sarvajfia-: of omniscient
byam: seed
In Him the seed of the omniscient is unexcelled and ultimate.
Vyiasa’s Commentary

Furthermore,

[Sarra:] In Him the seed of the omniscient is unexcelled and

ultimate.
All this lesser or greater apprehension and the process of appre-
hension arising from the past, future or the immediate, relating to
each severally or collectively as well as supersensually, is the seed
of the omniscient. Expanding gradually, the one in whom it reaches
its ultimate and is unexcelled, is the omniscient one. The seed of
the omniscient has a limited measure and does excel; hence (it is to
be concluded that) it also reaches its ultimate dimension.

The one in whom knowledge reaches its ultimate dimension is
the omniscient one. He is the special purusha; this is it.

The power of inference 1s exhausted in producing a conclusion
regarding only the general. It has not the power to help determine
the particular. Therefore one should seek out the particulars con-
cerning Him, such as His names, from the authoritative textual
tradition (@gama).

Even though He has no reason to benefit (anu-graha) Himself,
His purpose is to confer grace (anu-ggaha) to the bemps, (deeming)
that “Throughout the cycles of creations, dissolutions and great
dissolutions through my teaching of knowledge and virtue | shall
deliver the purushas who are transmigrating in samsdra.”

As is said, “The first wise being, the illustrious supreme sage,
296 SUTRA 1.25
directing a produced mind, taught the tradition (tantra) out of
compassion to Asuri, a seeker after knowledge.”

A Review of Vyasa’s Commentary

Vyasa lists the various limitations of the knowledge of delimited

beings. Their knowledge may be

(a) of the past, the future, or the immediate present,

(b) in relation to a single object, entity or experience, or to a

collective, aggregrate or composite of many,

(c) gained through the senses, or supersensual (atindriya).
The word atindriya means that the knowledge may be gained by
means other than the senses, as in the case of yogis. Yet this type
of knowledge has its limitations and does not make the accom-
plished yogi into an omniscient being. The word atindriya also
refers to the knowledge of objects which cannot be perceived with
the senses because they are too small (RS) (for example, atoms),
too distant, or concealed in some other way.

The knowledge of beings may be extremely little or may increase
in degrees. Grahana is translated to mean both the process of
apprehension as well as the instruments of apprehension. The de-
gree of knowledge of each living entity depends on the limit of the
instruments of apprehension that it possesses. With each degree of
knowledge manifest in delimited beings it is assumed that a higher
degree of knowledge exists. Knowledge itself may be little or its
scope may be of little things and thus delimited. Similarly it may
become expanded and become greater knowledge, or the knowl-
edge may be of things larger in scope.

All of this knowledge in the delimited entities is yet the seed of
omniscience, in that it contains knowledge from the omniscient
one. We observe the fact that knowledge increases and expands,
the higher knowledge excelling the lower. The one in whom this
excelling reaches its ultimate limit, beyond which there is no higher
excellence, is the omniscient, special purusha. We reach this con-
clusion about His omniscience through inference; seeing the grad-
ual expansion of knowledge among beings, we infer the existence
SOTRA 1.25 297
of a Being in whom it reaches its ultimate excellence.

An inference leads to a conclusion about the general only. For
specific knowledge concerning the names and so forth of iShvara,
our source of information is in the scriptures and traditions. This
knowledge found in the scriptures and traditions is not arrived at
through inference but is conferred upon realized beings by ishvara,
who has no reason to benefit Himself but benefits beings only as a
way of compassionate grace. It is not a desire or a want on His
part; rather, He sees within His omniscient nature that “Through-
out the cycles of creations, dissolutions and the larger cycles of the
same I shall cause deliverance of purushas who are transmigrating
in the world. I shall do so by inspiring into them the teachings of
knowledge and virtue.” It is thus that the sage Pafichashikha states
that the first wise one, Hiranya-garbha, created a great mind into
whom He incarnated, becoming the sage Kapila, the founder of
the Sankhya-yoga system. Kapila then taught his disciple, named
Asuri, and the tradition continues even to the present day.

Now, in the light of this review, the various points need to be
discussed.

Discussion

It 1s first necessary to settle on a correct reading of the sitra.
Vyasa and most other commentators (VM, VB, BR, BG, Sh, RY,
AD, NTB, BM) have preferred the reading

sarvajfia-bijam. seed of the omniscient.

NB, AD and SS clearly favour

sarvajfiya-biam: seed of omniscience.

Because Vyasa 1s the ancientmost commentator, and himself a
rshi, his reading will be adhered to. Some commentators, however,
failing to follow Vyasa’s explanation, do not fully understand the
meaning of the phrase “seed of the omniscient,” which is clarified
in the review above. Although VB acknowledges the alternative
rendering “seed of omniscience,” he feels that the two readings
298 SUTRA 1.25
have the same intent. NB and SS accept only “seed of omni-
science.”

It is clear that the phrase “seed of the omniscient” indicates the
presence of the omniscient one as a seed within all, because of
which a little knowledge is manifest in delimited beings. That
knowledge is the seed of the omniscient one (sarva-jfia), the igshvara
Himself, who is then called (in the next siitra) the guru of all. The
rendering “seed of omniscience” indicates the presence of only one
power, that of omniscience, in living beings, and consequently there
is no doubt that Vydsa’s original reading, sarvajfia-bijam ‘seed of
the omniscient’, is accurate.

The (NTB) knowledge of entities like ourselves has as its sine
qua non (a-vina-bhdva) the presence of the knowledge of the om-
niscient one, for anything delimited is always dependent upon a
homogeneous unlimited, the excelled dependent upon the unex-
celled of its own kind. For example, the larger space is the sine qua
non of the lesser space in a jar (NTB, RY, SS). The increase or
decrease of tamas, which normally veils the buddhi, determines
one’s capacity for more or less knowledge (VM). As the moon is
naturally overpowered by the sun, so rajas and tamas are easily
overcome by sattva (RS). This enhanced sattva increases the capa-
city for knowledge among the various beings. Thus there exist
varying capacities for knowledge, the limitations of which have
been delineated by Vydsa as follows: Some know only the past or
the present or the future or some very minute items like atoms or
vast things like spacey some know these a little, some know them
more and some others know them yet more; some know a single
object, others know objects collectively, compounded or aggregated;
some know few, others know many; some know the objects that
are within the grasp of the senses, others know suprasensual ob-
jects also.

The fact remains in any case that small things indicate the exis-
tence of objects of larger dimensions. The small size of a berry
(VM) indicates the possibility of the existence of a larger fruit. But
if we keep enlarging our vision, the idea of greatness and expansion
eventually reaches the point where there is no possibility of any
SOTRA 1.25 299
greater excellence. There has to be some final entity beyond which
excellence and expansion cannot be thought of (NB). There the
finitude ceases. Such is the case with 4tman, the self (VM), or with
ighvara. The knowledge in each delimited entity has within it a
seed of the omniscient; it grows till each being reaches ighvara.

The word bija (seed) is also explained as liriga (the sign, an
indicator) (VB, NB, BM) to help in an inference. The degrees (RS)
of finitude help one to infer an infinitude. An inch, a foot, a yard,
a mile, a light-year finally go on to support the idea of an unex-
celled distance—infinite space. The degrees of material objects
starting from the minutest atom to the vastest radical matter,
prakrti itself, are thus inferable, the vast from the minute. The
finitude is excelled by larger finitudes, but infinitude is unexcelled
by any beyond. Similarly, the capacity of knowledge begins with
small degrees, such as that of an insect, and goes on to that ofa
human being, all excelled by the relatively higher knowledge, till
we reach, by inference alone, that one whose knowledge is infinite.
Here RS blunders by saying:

Ishvara is the one who possesses the mind-field, chitta, with the
capacity of infinite knowledge.
Mind being a material evolute, God cannot be dependent on such
an evolute for His knowledge. He may rule over the universe
through a universal mind (samashti-chitta), but within Himself His
omniscience cannot be dependent on the capacity of such a mind.

According to BR, AD and SS, diya means the root. The root of
all knowledge, even that seen in small degrees among beings of
varying capacities, exists in that igshvara. Obviously this pertains to
such statements as

The universe is the ashvattha tree with its roots above, branches

below.
Bhagavad-gita XV.1
The above concludes the discussion on the following paragraphs
from Vydsa’s commentary on Sitra 1.25:
300 SOTRA 1.25

All this lesser or greater apprehension and the process of appre-
hension arising from the past, future or the immediate, relating
to each severally or collectively as well as supersensually, is the
seed of the omniscient. Expanding gradually, the one in whom it
reaches its ultimate and is unexcelled, is the omniscient one. The
seed of the omniscient has a limited measure and does excel;
hence (it is to be concluded that) it also reaches its ultimate
dimension.

The one in whom knowledge reaches its ultimate dimension is
the omniscient one. He is the special purusha; this is it.

Further, we read from Vyasa:

The power of inference is exhausted in producing a conclusion
regarding only the general. It has not the power to help determine
the particular. Therefore one should seek out the particulars con-
cerning Him, such as His names, from the authoritative textual
tradition (agama).

Seeing that in degrees of knowledge, the lesser is always excelled
by the greater, we infer in general that there must be some omni-
scient being in whom knowledge reaches its highest excellence. The
particulars of the nature of such a being are to be learned only
from the authority of dgama, statements of realized ones whether
in person, in a tradition or in the scriptures. For a discussion on
the self-authenticated veracity of agama, see Siitra 1.7.

Vyasa says that

One should seek out the particulars concerning Him, such as His

names
Names such as Shiva (the Benevolent One), iShvara (the Lord)
(VM), brahman (the Expansive One), antar-yamin (Pervading
Within All Things and Beings), parama-Gtman (the Supreme Self)
(VB) and others preferred by different commentators which are
referred to in various texts. The phrase “such as His names” implies
that not only the names but other facts also can be known. These
facts might be, for instance, statements regarding His shad-angatd,
“being constituted of six complements,” or His avyayata, “immuta-
bilities.” For example, it 1s said that
SOTRA 1.25 301
Those who know His order, ordinance or system (vidhi) state that
sarvajfiata: omniscience
trpti: satiety
anddhi-bodha: beginningless wisdom (enlightenment)
svatantrata: sovereignty
nityam a-lupta-shakti: power, potentia (Shakti) that never
suffers a loss or reduction
ananta-Shakti: infinite power, potentia (Shakti)
these six constitute the complements, avigas, of the Great Lord.
Vayu-purana X11.33
Furthermore,
jnana: knowledge
vairagya: dispassion
aishvarya: lordship
tapas: ascetic power
satya: truth
kshama: forgiveness
dahrti: fortitude
srashtrtva: creativity
Gtma-sambodha: full self-awareness
adhishthatrtva: command over the dominion
these ten immutables are definite in the Lord.
Vayu-puradna X.65-66

Such are the powers of the Lord (VM, NB, NTC, RY) as ex-
pressed in the scriptures. Similarly (VB) the attributes such as
perfect bliss, perfect compassion, transcendence, and being the
cause and support of the universe are to be included and under-
stood on scriptural authority.

This raises the question as to the true identity of the Lord.
There are (VB, NB, NTC) numerous names and forms to which
the divinity 1s attributed. These include the trinity of Brahma,
Vishnu, Shiva, their incarnations (avataras) such as Rama and
Krshna, the various celestial bzings, and so forth. Which of these
beings is the true Lord? The question is answered by quoting Vishnu-
purana 1.22.58 and stating that all these are simply the powers,
Shaktis, of the One Lord (VM, NB, NTC). No distinction can ever
302 SUTRA 1.25

be made between the power and the powerful one, between the
potentia (Shakti) and the omnipotent (Shaktimdn). It is thus that
all these beings, manifestations of one Lord, are said to possess the
attributes of the One. By themselves they are not the Lord. For
example, among the trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the
Preserver), and Rudra (Shiva) (the Dissolver), Brahma takes the
universe as his body much as the little jivas, individual souls, iden-
tify with their limited bodies. He is not the Lord (HA). As explained
in Sutra I.19, such beings are simply advanced souls. Often these
souls identify with the Lord (NTC), and attaining such a height,
serve as vehicles for the Lord’s descending power and become
avataras.22 Such ones are worshipped and honoured only as the
various powers of the one God, sharing in His identity, inseparable
from Him as His powers. Thus only the one God is praised when
they are praised. Ultimately they, too, have to liberate themselves
from their universe-bodies, returning into the Supreme One, whose
Shaktis they are and who never enters into the play (/i/a) of the
universe. It is He whose name is OM.

The question arises: Since God is ever free (VB), ever satiated
(VM, NB) and maintains supreme vairagya (VM), how can He
have any craving to achieve anything? Being compassionate, He
can produce only happiness, and it would be unthinkable that He
could create a world full of pain for the beings therein (VM, NB).
Even though He has the total power of activity (kriya), there seems
to be no reason or purpose for any endeavour on His part with
respect to producing the universe or revealing knowledge. Vyasa
answers:

Even though He has no reason to benefit (anu-graha) Himself,
His purpose 1s to confer grace (anu-graha) to the beings, (deem-
ing) that “Throughout the cycles of creations, dissolutions and
great dissolutions through my teaching of knowledge and virtue |
shall deliver the purushas who are transmigrating in sarsara.”
The Lord has no reason to act in order to accomplish anything to
favour or satisfy Himself. His endeavour arising from His knowledge
22. For further discussion see pp. 121-28, including chart 1, of the author’s book God
(Honesdale, Pa Himalayan International Institute of Yoga Science and Philosophy, !979)
SOTRA 1.25 303
and will, however, continues eternally through the cycles (pravadha-
anadi) (NB). The fact of His compassion cannot be challenged
simply on the grounds that beings suffer in His creation. He pro-
vides knowledge all the way from scriptural revelation to discrimi-
nating wisdom. Beings enjoy pleasure when acting in accordance
with that knowledge and suffer pain when failing to do so. Dis-
criminating wisdom in beings matures only through the combina-
tion (samucchaya) of jfiana (knowledge) and dharma (virtue), and
not by either one separately. These beings transmigrate in samsdra,
die and are reborn within kalpas (cycles of creation), pralayas
(partial dissolutions of universes), and mahda-pralayas (total dis-
solutions after one thousand cycles). It is not that the Lord takes a
vow or makes a declaration to bring deliverance in the future, but
rather that His will, knowledge and compassion being eternal, He
simply knows that He is to help their deliverance continuously by
imparting the scriptural revealed knowledge and discriminating
wisdom (viveka-khyati) (VM, NB, HA). Obviously, the revealed
knowledge is open to all, but viveka-khy@ti is arrived at only
through the practice of dhyana and samadhi, which cannot be
achieved without the Lord’s grace.

In the current kalpa the revealed knowledge was imparted by
Kapila, an incarnation of God. Vyasa quotes an ancient saying of
PajichaShikha:

“The first wise being, the illustrious supreme sage, directing a

produced mind, taught the tradition (tantra) out of compassion

to Asuri, a seeker after knowledge.”
According to the tradition, knowledge 1s revealed in the minds of
great sages in the beginning of each cycle of creation. However, the
revelation may be granted again and again to wise beings in
samadhi throughout the cycle.?? Kapila is the first rsh: to whom
the knowledge of Sankhya-yoga was given; he is therefore the first
wise being, the illustrious supreme sage of this lineage. He is re-
garded as one of the twenty-four incarnations of Vishnu, and the
23. For further information see pp 17-19, 65-102, and 147-76 of the author’s book Mantra
and Meditation (Honesdale, Pa Himalayan International Institute of Yoga Science and
Philosophy, 1981)
304 SOTRA 1.25
story of his birth and teaching is given in the Bhdgavata-purana.
The phrase “produced mind” (nirmdna-chitta)24 will be explained

in Sutra 1V.4. An incarnation, sage or guru may send forth a spark
of his asmita into the mind of a disciple in an initiatory process
whereby the reality and the experience of the object of teaching is
transferred into the disciple’s mind, the disciple then being known
as the teacher’s “mental offspring” (manasa-putra),> the pure part
of his mind having been produced from a spark of the guru’s mind.
It is thus that the lineage of produced minds, the mental off-
springs, continues to impart knowledge down through the genera-
tions. Kapila thus taught Asuri, whose disciple was Pafichashikha,
from whom the sage Vy4sa quotes:

“The first wise being, the illustrious supreme sage, directing a

produced mind, taught the tradition (tantra) out of compassion

to Asuri, a seeker after knowledge.”
24 Ibid., pp 147-76, fora detailed description of the initiatory process
25 Ibid
SUTRA 126 305
Sitral.26 Yyrarata qe: areraraqaesara
pirvesham api guruh kalena
an-avachchhedat?®
purvesham: of the first, ancient, former (teachers)
api: even, also
guruh: guru
kalena: by time
an-avachchhedat: there being no delimitation, break, division
He is the guru even of the very first, the ancient and the former
teachers, because in Him there is no delimitation by time.
Vyasa’s Commentary
The same one
[Satra:] 1s the guru even of the very first, the ancient and the
former teachers, because in Him there is no delimitation by time.
The past and ancient teachers, even the very first ones, are delimited
by time. The one in whom time does not approach and revolve as
a condition (RP) with the effect of delimitation is the guru of even
the past, the ancient and the very first ones. Just as this is proved
in the beginning of the current creation on the grounds of His
supremacy, which initiates and propels the process of creation and
revelation, so also the same should be understood with regard to
the creations that have already transpired, and so forth.
Discussion
The word parva can mean “anything past, former, anterior,
preceding,” “ancient,” and “the very first one.” God is the guru of
all the ones who have preceded us: those of the immediate past; the
26 Some texts read the sitra as
Sa esha parvesham apt guruh halena an-avachchhedat
but we concur with VM that the words sa eshah are Vyasa’s introduction to the sitra
306 SUTRA 1.26

ancient ones; as well as the very first gurus of the creation,2” even
of those like Hiranya-garbha (BG, NTB, HA), Brahma, Vishnu,
Shiva (VB, NBB, AD, SS, BM) and others. He is the guru of
Brahma, etc. and of the preceding creations as well (NB). The
word api ‘also’ is meant to include both prakrti and the individual
souls (jivas) because He is their true self (atman). The ruling power
(adhishthatr) of any entity is often called its self (4tman); for ex-
ample, the sun is the 4tman of the eye, and the soul (jiva) is the
atman of the body (NB). Being the 4tman of souls, God pervades
them, 1s their indweller (antar-yamin) (VB, NB, NBB) and their
father (VB, NBB). In the Ved&ntic interpretation this fatherhood
simply means that souls are to God as sons and daughters are toa
father or sparks are to a fire. Being the dweller within (antar-
yamin) them, He gives them the eye of knowledge (VB, BG, NB,
NBB). Souls are delimited by the divisions of time, from which He
is free. The universe and the universal mind from which individual
minds are further created are all His creation and partake of His
knowledge. They become conditioned by time, but He remains
untouched. They have a beginning through Him, but He is begin-
ningless (BR et al.).

This applies not merely to this creation but to all the past crea-
tions. We have translated the single, compound word prakarsha-
gati as:

His supremacy, which initiates and propels the process of creation

and revelation
Prakarsha means supremacy (from pra + krsh ‘to draw forth’). He
draws the universe forth from prakrti and is therefore supreme
over it. The prefix pra expresses “initiating” and “propelling”; the
propulsion from ishvara continues through the entire process of
producing the modifications of prakrti, from mahat to the very
earth element. This is creation. Within the same creation occurs
27 For further detail see the rendering of the verses from chapter I of the Law's of Manu in
the author’s book Mantra and Meditation (Honesdale, Pa Himalayan International Insti-
tute of Yoga Science and Philosophy, 1981), pp 135-38
SUTRA 1.26 307
the multiplying of soul sparks to whom knowledge is revealed and
through whom it is transmitted in the guru lineage. The sense of
this movement in creation and revelation is expressed by the word
gati, from the verb root gam ‘to know; to move; to reach’, normally
translated into English as “to go.”

VB, NB, NBB have raised a question here. The Sankhya philoso-
phy upholds the sovereignty of both purusha and prakrti as two
independent, coequal entities. How is it possible then that purusha
draws nature forth into the process of creation and propels its
modifications? This is answered by referring to YS IV.3. An effi-
cient cause does not produce an effect out of the material cause
but rather provides the condition to which the inherent nature of
the material cause responds and thereby produces its own modifi-
cation. For example, a farmer does not create the essence of his
plants. He merely opens the water channel; the water flows natu-
rally and irrigates the plants. Or, the fact that a potter, the efficient
cause, turns the potter’s wheel does not detract from the inherent
capacity of the wheel to help shape the pot. Similarly, God’s pres-
ence as the efficient cause of the universe does not detract from
prakrti’s inherent capacity for the modifications that occur in the
process of creation, in which revelations also occur (VB, NB, NBB).

In this context, the beginnings of the yoga lineage in the current
creation have already been stated in Vyasa’s commentary on the
last sitra. The tradition and texts (@gama) also tell us that the
same process has occurred in the preceding creations (purva) and
that God is the guru of the gurus (such as Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva,
and others) of those creations as well (NB). As Vydsa says,

The same should be understood with regard to the creations that
have already transpired, and so forth.
Obviously “and so forth” has the force of including any future
creations, because what is past or future to us is not so to God;
time as a condition of delimitation has no connection with God,
does not approach or revolve as a condition which might delimit
His will, knowledge, and action by any division of time. In future
308 SUTRA 126

creations the substance of this very siitra will be revealed within
the self of the sages again and again, so that the term parva, “the
preceding gurus,” may refer also to those who are yet to come even
in any current or future creations.
SOTRA 1.27 309
Satra 1.27 AST AAR: WWF: |
tasya vachakah pranavah

tasya: his

vachakah: signifier, signifying word or name (is)

pranavah: the word OM
The word OM is His significator (name).

Vyasa’s Commentary

God (iShvara) is the signified meaning of OM. Now, is this
relationship of the signified with the signifier established by con-
vention or is it like the lamp and the light?

This relationship of the signified with the signifier is permanent.
God’s convention, however, carries forward only the permanent
meaning, just as an already established relationship of a father and
a son is elucidated by conventionally indicating, This is his father,
This is his son.

So in different creations too the convention, being dependent
upon the inherent power (Shakti) of the signified and the signifier,
is indicated the same way as before. Those who know the tradition
categorically assert that the relationship of the word and the mean-
ing 1s eternal because the perception of knowledge in consciousness
as well as the continuity of usage 1s eternal.

Discussion

Because Siitra 1.23 asserted the possibility that samadhi may be
attained through the practice of the presence of God (ishvara-
pranidhana), Siitras 1.24-26 were devoted to explaining ighvara.
Sitra 1.27 1s preparatory to Sitra I 28, which explains pranidhdna.

The name of God 1s OM It is a tradition of the mantra science
that certain mantras are given specific names. The mantra OM is
called pranava. Many different etymological derivations are sug-
gested by various commentators. For instance:
310 SOTRA 1.27

1. From prefix pra and verb nu: “whereby He is eminently eulo-
gized” (BR, SS, Sh), or “that which eulogizes Him” (BR, Sh).

2. From prefixes pra and ni and verb dhd, as in pranidhana:
“whereby He is placed close, brought close, by those who
practise His presence (pra-ni-dhdatrs)” (Sh). Or “whereby one
places God in the mind,” for it is by a word or a name that
one bears those in mind who are absent or intangible (Sh).

3. From pra + ni + dha and av: “He who protects from samsdara
the devotees (pra-ni-dhatrs) who practise His presence,” or
“He who leads (pra + nir + va) the devotees to nirvana” (Sh).

The only way one who has not yet realized God can practise His
presence is through His name, which is OM. The perennial question
of Indian philosophy is raised again here: What is the relationship
of the word and its meaning??* Although this is answered in greater
detail under Yoga-sitras 111.17, here only the relevant part is briefly
discussed. In this regard (HA) there are two kinds of objects: (1)
Those which can be experienced without a name. For example,
even if one does not know the word “blue,” the colour is exper-
ienced with the eye. (2) Those which cannot be experienced without
a word and its inherent meaning. For example, one cannot knowa
certain John as the son of Jack and Jack as John’s father without
the words “father” and “son” and the meaning that these words
connote. Since God, unlike the colour blue, is not tangible to the
senses, He cannot be experienced by the unrealized. He can only
be signified by His name, OM. Only thus can pranidhana, His
presence, be practised.

Now, there are some philosophers of language who believe that
the relationship of words and meanings 1s established by the con-
vention of usage alone. So Vyasa raises the question:

God (ishvara) 1s the signified meaning of OM Now, 1s this rela-

tionship of the signified with the signifier established by conven-

tion or 1s it like the lamp and the light?
28 A detailed examination of the origins, levels and significances of words 1s found in
chapters 3, 5, 7, and 8, and pp 75-77 and 121-3! of the author’, book Mantra and
Halt aoa Pa Himalayan International Institute of Yoga Science and Philos-
SOTRA 1.27 311
If this relationship between the word and the meaning were eternal,
inherent or natural and not a conventional one, a word should
need no other pointer than “This word signifies this object”; it
should simply convey itself. Thus where a word was not applicable,
it would simply not signify the unrelated object. A thousand lamps
cannot illuminate a jar that is simply not there (VM, NB). It is
obvious, however, that if one so wishes, one can use the word
“elephant” for a camel and start a fresh convention (VM). Similarly,
is not God’s name, OM, simply a matter of usage and convention,
the way a father gives his son the appellation, say, “Devadatta”
(VB)?

In other words, one may ask (RY) whether the relationship
between word and meaning is produced by convention or only
expressed by it. It is not produced, because then iShvara would
have to produce it by fitting together the words and the meanings
in the beginning of each cycle of creation, independent of the
convention of the preceding cycle, thus contradicting the convention.
Nor can it merely be expressed, because if it already exists, its
expression (for example, by a father indicating about his son that
“This is the son”) is superfluous insofar as its effect on the relation-
ship is concerned.

To resolve these doubts and contradictions, Vyasa says:

This relationship of the signified with the signifier is permanent.
God’s convention, however, carries forward only the permanent
meaning, just as the already established relationship of a father
and a son ts elucidated by conventionally indicating, This 1s his
father, This 1s his son.
The relationship of the word and the meaning is like the lamp and
its light, sine qua non, indivisible (NBB).

The superimposition (adAydsa) of one on the other (NB, NBB)
will be explained further in Sitra III.17 Even though in the Maha-
bhashya Patafijali the grammarian has said that ordinarily sarve
sarvartha-vachakah, “all words may denote all meanings,” yet it is
God’s convention and revelation that is determinative and elucida-
tive (VM) He carries forward an eternally established power from
312. SOTRA 1.27
one creation to the next, each time connecting the words to their
meanings and revealing the same in the Vedas in passages such as:
OM KHAM BRAHMA
OM SPACE BRAHMAN
Yajur-veda XL.17

The relation between the two is one of identity. The two are
identical, inseparable. This is their inherent power (Shakti) (VB,
NB, NBB), which is not a third, separate factor. This, however,
does not rule out the human freedom to establish fresh conventions
so long as they do not transgress the eternal, divine ones; a father
may still name his son “Devadatta,” which is not his eternal name.
But God has to reveal the eternal words and meanings in the
beginning of each creation because during the dissolution period
the sarhnskadras gathered around the jivas also are dissolved and
there is no continuation of memory (RY).

It is a principle of Sankhya philosophy that a word or sound is
one of the five zan-m4tras, subtle elements, modifications of prakrti.
At the dissolution of the universe they all dissolve, together with
their meanings, which are the objects related to them and connoted
by them. Their Shakti, thus having been dissolved, is by no means
permanently destroyed. As some plants become dormant in the hot
season but regenerate at the touch of the rain in the season of the
monsoons, so the objects—the meanings signified—-and the words
as their signifiers reappear together with their inherent Shakti upon
the moment of the new creation. God’s will alone (BM) then indi-
cates, Let this be the word; let this be the meaning. Vyasa says:

So in different creations too the convention, being dependent
upon the inherent power (Shakti) of the signified and the signifier,
1s indicated the same way as before Those who know the tradition
categorically assert that the relationship of the word and the
meaning 1s eternal because the perception of knowledge in con-
sciousness as well as the continuity of usage is eternal.
Agamin, those who are versed in the agama, the textual authority
as the tradition of the yoga lineage, uphold the view that
SOTRA 127 313
nityah Shabdartha-sambandhah.
The relationship of the word and the meaning is eternal.
This echoes Vararuchi’s first varttika in Patafijali’s Mahabhashya
(1.1) on Panini’s grammar:
siddhe Shabdartha-sambandhe,
which has the identical translation.

In Vydsa’s passage we have translated the word sam-prati-patti

as:

the perception of knowledge in consciousness as well as the con-

tinuity of usage.
Of these two meanings, the first is the derivative (yaugika) mean-
ing and the second 1s the conventional (ré#g@hi) meaning. The com-
mentators (VM, VB, NB, NBB, RY, HA) have all translated the
word sam-prati-patti only as the equivalent of vyavahdara-param-
para, “continuity of usage,” but we have chosen to give prominence
to the derivative meaning. In Sitra 1.25 it was stated that God’s
names, etc. should be learned from Ggama, the textual authority
and the tradition of the lineage. Such authority begins and the
lineage is derived from the fact of revelation, the perception of
knowledge in consciousness. Especially with regard to the name of
God, the usage has no other basis and its continuity 1n the usage is
dependent thereupon.

We have said above that the sound is a modification of prakrti
and is subject to creation and dissolution. However, knowledge of
God 1s eternal. The spoken word is its grossest vehicle. The knowl-
edge, which 1s not a possession of God as an object separate from
Him but rather is one with His self-nature, uses the sound and the
word as His vehicle. The knowledge part of the word is ki#jastha-
nitya: eternal as an Absolute; immutable and never modified. It is
the half mora of OM, the silence, beyond the three—a, u, m—
which the yogis experience in samadhi. Only the physical sound is
the modifiable eternal (pravaha-nitya) which is manifested and un-
manifested, appears and disappears, with creations and dissolutions.
314. SOTRA 127
At a transcendent level to say that “God” is the meaning of the
word OM falls within the category of linguistic misconception or
imaginary cognition (vikalpa) defined in Siitra 1.9 (NB). OM as the
eternal and immutable knowledge is not a name of God, separate
from Him. It is the same as God, just as its syllabic components
a,u,m are the very Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva who revolve in and
with the cycles of samsdra. These sounds are their sonar bodies, as
the silent knowledge beyond them is God’s own knowledge-self.
This truly is the essence of this sfitra but it can be understood only
by studying the Mandukya Upanishad with Gaudapada’s karika
verses and Shankaracharya’s commentary thereupon.
VB and BGG quote Yajfiavalkya:

He is the Divine Being, deva, with intangible form,

to be grasped only by intent concentration,

unified with the mind.

His name is OM.

Called by this name, pleased,

He confers grace.

Brhad-yogi-yajfavalkya-smrti 11.61

“Unified with the mind” in the above passage means that His
power is drawn into the mind when the meditator calls upon Him
in particular, advanced meditative processes (NTC). This being the
origin and the end of all mantras renders to the devotee the fruit of
the practice of all other mantras
SOTRA 1.28 315
Sitral28  asaecaturaqg
taj-japas tad-artha-bhavanam
tat-japah: repetition, recitation of that (and)
tat-: of that — cultivating, absorbing,
artha-: meaning — . the meaning of that
bhavanam: absorbing, cultivating
The japa”? of that name, and cultivating and absorbing its mean-
ing (is called %hvara-pranidhana, the practice of the presence of
God).3®
Vyasa’s Commentary
When the yogi has understood the nature of the signifier and the
signified, his
[Satra:] japa of that name and cultivating and absorbing its
meaning (1s called iShvara-pranidhana, the practice of the presence
of God).
(This means) the japa of OM, and cultivating, impressing upon
one’s mind and absorbing it into God who is the significatum
(abhidheya) of the word OM. As the yogi performs the japa of
OM and becomes intent upon cultivating and impressing upon the
mind the meaning of the word OM, his mind-field succeeds in
becoming one-pointed. As is said:
With the aid of silent recitation (svd@dhydya) let one establish the
posture, sitting in yoga. Through yoga too they sit for silent
recitation By pertecting silent recitation and yoga together the
Supreme Self shines forth
29 The word japa is left untranslated for want of an appropriate Western equivalent
Chant, mantra recitation, contemplation, are all parts of the complete process of japa For
the various progressively refined states of sapa, see chapter 13 in the author’s book Mantra
and Meditation (Honesdale, Pa) Himalayan International Institute of Yoga Science and
Philosophy, 1981)
30 The parenthetical addition in the translation 1s an anu-vriti, a word brought forward (in
this instance, from Sitra I 23)
316 SOTRA 1.28
Discussion

As explained in the previous siitra, since it is not possible for an
ordinary person to practise the presence of God (iShvara-prani-
dhana) without having reached the samadhi of God-realization,
some other medium within reach of the mind has to be resorted to.
The sound that is God’s name, and is identical with Him, is within
reach of the mind so far as its first three components, a, u, m, are
the objects of concentration. The tradition of the Upanishads and
the lineage of the yogis speaks of the silent half mora that follows
the three articulate components and is experienced only beyond
the mind. The tast siitra defined this medium, OM, as the name of
God, and the current siitra explains practising the presence (prani-
dhana) of God. Says Vyasa:

When the yogi has nderstood the nature of the signifier and the
signified,
only then does the actual pranidhana which is japa begin.

Patafijali equates pranidhana with the practice of bhavana, which
1s translated as “cultivating or absorbing the real meaning (in medi-
tation)” (¥M, BR, AD, BM). It begins at a level within the limits
of a practitioner’s capacity. One may recite the word methodically
or let it become a silent mental contemplation (BM). But japa
must not be purely the recitation of the word, but rather bha@vana
of the meaning of the word, that is, of the God who is signified by
that word and 1s one with it. The yapa must be accompanied with
meditation (dhyana) on Brahman (VB), or the Supreme Self, with
faith and devotion (NB). In fact the bha@vana, contemplation of
Brahman, should continue all the way through dha@rana, dhyana
and samadhi (BG). In other words the japa of the word, through
its association, reminds one of that which it signifies, and the mind
begins to dwell upon Him whose omniscience and other attributes
are known to the practitioner (HA). Japa cannot be done without
this association of the word and its meaning. (The significance of
bhavana has also been explained and discussed in Sitra 1.17, q.v.).

VB and NBB explain that bhavana or pranidhana 1s experienced
SOTRA 1.28 317
at two levels. First, the practitioner knows that parts and a whole
are inseparable, effect and cause are unified, the power and the
powerful (Shakti and ShaktimGn) are one, and thus he contemplates
and then experiences himself permeated by and unified with
Brahman—like heat and fire in a hot iron ball, the heat and the
hot object being unified. Later, the practitioner discriminates be-
tween prakrti and purusha and then knows “I am Brahman.” This
explanation of bhdvana is Vedantic and is not mentioned by Patafi-
jali or Vyasa.

As the yogi undertakes this practice, says Vyasa:

his mind-field succeeds in becoming one-pointed.

In the gross, recitative level of the articulate japa—even if the
tongue is silent and the mind alone recites the word—the mind is
in the vikshipta state, distracted by other thoughts. As the meaning,
the very presence of God, becomes the primary experience, the
first stages of samadhi ensue. In sa-vitarka the relationship of the
word and the meaning is maintained. As one approaches nir-vitarka
(samadhi without vitarkas), the separation of the word, the meaning
and their relationship ceases, and the experience is unified. This
entry into samadhi is what is meant by referring to the mind-field’s
becoming one-pointed, moving away from wikshipta to ekdgra.

Even if the meditation is on the lesser components of the mean-
ing of OM (on Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva and so forth, who are
signified parts of OM—a, u, m) the same process of development
occurs, for that concentration also is on the divine consciousness
that pervades these deific presences (NB). We have translated sami-
Padyate as “succeeds ” The meaning is actually much richer: “one
prospers, reaches the desired enrichment, finds fulfilment in all
directions (NB); one comes to rest in the Supreme Self, becomes
filled with the Supreme Self ”

In the last siitra we spoke of the power (Shakti) of the word and
the meaning of the word, respectively known as vachaka (that
which enunciates, signifies) and vachya (that which 1s enunciated,
signified). As the yapa becomes more and more refined, the power
318 SUTRA 1.28

of the vachaka is reduced till only the va@chya remains; the word
ceases and meaning alone shines so as to totally occupy the mind
until even the mind becomes, as it were, absent, taking the form of
the object of concentration as stated in YS 1.43 and III.3.

Following this thought comes the verse quoted by VyaAsa, attri-
buted to his father, Parashara, in Vishnu-purdana 111.6.2:

With the aid of silent recitation (svadhyaya) let one establish the

posture, sitting in yoga. Through yoga too they sit for silent

recitation. By perfecting silent recitation and yoga together the

Supreme Self shines forth.
The word svadhyaya is defined by Vyasa in YS II.1 as

japa of the purificatories like OM, and the study of scriptures

that lead to liberation,
and again in YS II.32 in almost identical words. Its effects are
described in YS 11.2 and H.44. The background meaning of the
term is in adhydya ‘study’ (in the formal sense of the study of the
Vedas), which traditionally has required reciting the Vedas, adher-
ing to strict principles of enunciation and accentuation, and memo-
rizing each word and annotation accurately. In fact both for the
purpose of study and the rituals, the Vedas must be recited aloud.
In this sense mere adhjdya is not japa. However, when the recita-
tion is to oneself only, then it becomes sva-adhy aya, self-study,
and then as a mental act it is called japa.

The term yoga in the verse under discussion means samadhi as it
was explained by Vyasa in YS 1.1.

It can be experientially proved that as one begins yapa, the mind
is stilled and thereby the posture becomes steady. The verb form
asita has been translated as

Let one establish the posture, sitting in yoga.
As the bhdvana of the meaning of the mantra becomes firm, the
presence, of God is experienced and samadhi ensues. Repeated
SOTRA 1.28 319
experience of deep meditation thus firms the practice of japa in
turn. It is felt by some commentators that svddhydya and yoga,
that is, apa and samadhi, cannot be simultaneous (VB); the thought
here is that one begins a meditation session with japa, which leads
into samadhi, and at the end one emerges from samadhi into japa
(VB, BM). This indeed is the case for a beginner in samadhi. But
the verse states clearly that fulfilment, enrichment, perfection (sam-
patti) of both japa and samadhi leads to illumination of the Su-
preme Self. At that level pranidhana or bhavana reaches the silent
mora, the half that is beyond the articulate three. There japa is not
even a mental endeavour and becomes one with samadhi.

Before we move on to the next sfitra, let us recapture the process

that has occurred so far.

«One has engaged in japa and bhdvana (Sitra 1.28) of OM, fora
long time, without interruption and with deep faith and com-
mitment (Siitra 1.14).

+The articulate form of the word has ceased.

«The power of that which enunciates (va@chaka) has been extin-
guished by that which 1s enunciated (vachya).

- All vikshepas having been eliminated, the mind-field has become
ekagra.

«All external objects of concentration have been abandoned.

«No further samskaras are gathered.

«Only the past sarhskdras maintain the momentum of physical
continuity.

«The self now dwells in the self.

The next siitra explains the natural concomitants of the yogi’s

development to such a degree.
320 SUTRA 1.29
Satra 1.29 AA: WA AATAPETTASTATATATT |
tatah pratyak-chetanadhigamo’py
antarayabhavash cha
tatah: then, through that (practice of the presence of God)
pratyak-: inward attainment of inward
chetana-: consciousness consciousness, or realization
adhigamah: attainment, realization of the inwardly
conscious (self)
api: too
antaraya-: (of) obstacles, impediments, obstructions
abhavah: absence, removal
cha: also
Then through the practice of the presence of God accrues the
attainment of inward consciousness and the realization of the
inwardly conscious self; also the impediments are removed, made
absent.
Vyasa’s Commentary
As to the impediments such as illness: well, through the practice
of the presence of God (iShvara-pranidhdGna) they cease to be. And
the realization of one’s true nature occurs. Just as God (ishvara) is
pure, joyful, absolute (Keva/a), without encumbrances, so also this
(little) purusha, who is the cause of buddhi’s accurate apprehen-
sion, is of the same nature—this is what he realizes.
Discussion
Patajijali and Vyasa are aware of many questions, doubts, prob-
lems, obstacles and impediments that appear all along the path.
No doubt their own disciples asked many questions. This can be
surmised from Vydsa’s wording here.
As to the impediments such as illness. well, through the practice
of the presence of God, they cease to be.
This is by way of assurance so that disciples would continue the
practice of japa following the prescriptions of Satra 1.14.
SOTRA 1.29 321

There is, however, a slight discrepancy between the siitra and
Vyasa’s commentary. The order in the sitra is, first, the realization
of the inward consciousness and, second, the absence of impedi-
ments. Vyasa, however, starts with removal of impediments, which
is, of course, more logical because only when the impediments are
removed can there ensue self-realization. The order in the sitra,
however, has its own reason. The first phrase of the sitra,

pratyak-chetana-adhigamah,
the attainment of inward consciousness and the realization of the
inwardly conscious self,
states the natural end result of what has been discussed from Sitras
1.23 to 1.28.

The grace of God, invited through the practice of japa and so
forth, naturally reverses the outward flow of awareness and draws
it inwards until it finally reaches the ultimate goal of self-realiza-
tion. All along the way the obstacles and impediments are removed
through the same continuous practice and by the same grace that
responds and uplifts and clears the paths and channels. This is
what the experience of initiates confirms. Since the inward flow of
consciousness and the removal of obstacles are concomitants of
each other, either one could be stated first.

Since a commentator’s work consists of clarifying subtleties for
those who are naturally more concerned about the present im-
pediments and obstacles, Vyasa assures them that these obstacles
will be overcome by continued practice of sapa and so forth until
final realization 1s reached. For those of greater experience he says
that grace turns the consciousness inwards, and thereby the impedi-
ments are naturally removed In this order, the next sitra naming
the impediments naturally follows.

There are differences of opinion on the meaning of the compound
phrase pratvah-chetand, which has been translated here as attain-
ment of inward consciousness, or realization of the inwardly con-
scious, the self. The word prarvak is derived from the prefix prati
‘towards’ and the verb root afich ‘to be directed; pointed or turned
towards a certain direction’. VM (and NB. RY, NTC) sees pratito
322. SOTRA 1.29

be a shortened form of pratipam ‘opposite’. So pratyafich or
pratyak to him means not “turned towards the spiritual self,” but
the opposite, “outwards,” and thus pratyak-chetand is that little,
ignorant self who is turned outwards because of avidyad away from
the Supreme One.

But others (BR, AD) see it differently. Pratipam ‘opposite’ to
them means the opposite of the common outward consciousness; it
means the power of the seer (drk-Shakti) as explained in Sitras
11.6,20. This is more in accordance with the tradition. In the Katha
Upanishad 1V.1,2 the outward consciousness is referred to as
pardafich or parak, from para + afich (‘turned away, directed away’
from the inward self towards distant objects). The word parafich
or parak is used in that sense elsewhere too (e.g., Aitareya Upani-
shad 111.3, Chha@ndogya Upanishad 1.6.8 and Brhadaranyaka Upani-
shad \V.4.1). Thus parafich or parak and pratyafich or pratyak are
antonyms. Pratyak is, thus, definitely inward consciousness. Even
if prati is short for pratipam ‘opposite’, it indicates to an initiate
that state whereby and wherein all previously held values are lit-
erally turned inside out. What was previously held to be reality
now loses its significance and the reality that 1s experienced in-
wards alone holds sway over one’s awareness.

VB and NBB explain prati in pratyak to mean “each.” Thus
God (iShvara) is pratyak-chetanda, the consciousness that is turned
towards each object. This explanation does not appear to fit.the
context or the intent of the sittra. The realization intended is not of
that consciousness which is turned towards all objects, but rather
the one withdrawn, turned towards the self. Granting that omni-
science ensues after self-realization, the current sttra is not refer-
ring to that siddhi. The intent of the siitra is simply to state that
through ishvara-pranidhana the consciousness 1s drawn inwards by
divine grace, naturally leading to realization of the inwardly con-
scious self. This is the same (RS) as the seer dwelling in his own
nature, explained in Sitra 1.3. So Vyasa says:

And the realization of one’s true nature occurs.
What exactly is meant by this realization? What does the yogi see
as the nature of the self? Vyasa explains:
SUTRA 1.29 323
Just as God is pure, joyful, absolute (kevala), without encum-
brances, so also this (little) purusha, who is the cause of buddhi’s
accurate apprehension, is of the same nature—this is what he
realizes.
(The phrase qualifying purusha as “the cause of buddhi’s accurate
apprehension” was discussed in Stra I.7 and need not be repeated
here.) That purusha who was thus qualified hitherto is now seen
beyond buddhi and other evolutes. It has re-cognized that it is
kevala, alone and without prakrti and free of the encumbrances
(upasargas) of the karmic cycles such as birth in a species, life
spans and pains and pleasures in those species and life spans (YS
11.13). The divine nature in the self is perceived. VB interprets the
statement in accordance with the Vedantic doctrine of the unity of
the little self and the Supreme Self. Here Vyasa comes closest to
stating the identity of the lower and the higher purusha but does
not quite do so. The particles }athd ‘just as’ and tathd ‘so also’
indicate similarity but not identity.

The sitra, it appears, means to say that iShvara-pranidhana
leads to self-realization; in self-realization one sees the similarity of
the natures of the little self and ishvara. The siitra says nothing of
the next step, which may be the Brahman-realization of Vedanta
but is not stated here to be so.

The question arises: How is it that the practice of the presence
of God can bring forth the realization of the nature of the individ-
ual self? How can attention directed towards one entity or object
ever bring forth the closeness of another? The answer (VB, VM,
NB, NBB, RY) 1s that attention directed towards something of a
totally contradictory or nonhomogeneous nature cannot bring forth
the understanding or the presence of its opposite. But, for example,
the study of one science helps us to understand another related
science also. That is why Vyasa has drawn attention to the simi-
larity of natures of the little and the greater purushas. The attention
directed towards the greater purusha naturally brings about the
realization of the nature of the little purusha.
324 SUTRA 1.30
Sitra 1.30 9 - Sarfereqareterawararcreattaeta-
witrera efaretesl APH ca TA EAA CAT
Perafaerarer ssa: |
vyadhi-styana-samShaya-pramadalasyavirati-
bhrantidarShanalabdhabhimikatvanavasthitatvani
chitta-vikshepas te’ntarayah
vyadhi-: illness
sty@na-: mental laziness, procrastination, mind’s idleness
samShaya-: doubt
pramada-: negligence
Glasya-: laziness, languor, sloth
a-virati-: failing to turn away from the world and the senses, non-
abstention
bhranti-darshana-: wrong views, confusion of philosophies
a-labdha-bhimikatva-: failing to gain a ground (and)
an-avasthitatvani: instability, mability to maintain the ground or
level
chitta-vikshepah: (are) distractions of the mind-field
te: they (are)
antaradyah. obstacles, impediments
Illness, mental idleness, doubt, negligence, sloth, non-abstention,
confusion of philosophies, failure to gain a ground and instability
are the distractions of the mind-field; they are the impediments.
Vyasa’s Commentary
Now, what are the impediments? The same as the distractions of
the mind-field. Again, what are those and how many?
[Sdrra‘] Illness, mental idleness, doubt, negligence, sloth, non-
abstention, confusion of philosophies, failure to gain a ground
and instability are the distractions of the mind-field; they are the
impediments
The nine impediments are the distractions of the mind-field.
They exist together with the vrttis of the mind-field. In their absence
SUTRA 1.30 325
the vrttis of the mind-field explained before do not exist. Of these:
eIllness is the imbalance of the body constituents, fluid essences

and senses.
« Styana is the mind’s idleness and procrastination.
«Doubt is the observation touching both ends: “It might be thus,
it might not be thus.”
«Negligence is not cultivating (bhdvana) the means that lead to
samadhi.
eSloth is the lack of initiative, propensity and perseverance be-
cause of heaviness of the body and the mind-field.
«Non-abstention is the mind-field’s failure to turn away from the
world and the senses, lustfulness consisting of involvement in
sensuality arising from proximity of and contact with sense
objects.
Confusion of philosophies is the condition called viparyaya.
-Failure to gain ground means not reaching the ground of
samadhi.
e Instability 1s the mind-field’s failure to be sustained in the ground
that has been attained.
Only upon achieving samadhi would that, the mind-field, stabilise.
These distractions (vikshepas) of the mind-field are called the
nine impurities of yoga, adversaries of yoga, obstacles or impedi-
ments to yoga.
Discussion
These tmpediments are called wiAshepas because they throw the
mind off (vi + AsAip) from the path of yoga (VM, VB). They cause
it to fall from yoga (RY, SS), thus causing the aspirant to become
a voga-brahshta (one who has fallen from the path of yoga), which
1s discussed in chapter 6 of the Bhagavad-gita. They appear with
the growth of the power of rayas and tamas (BR, NB, BM) and
prevent accomplishment of one-pointedness (BR), the ekdgra state,
which 1s the fourth of the five grounds (bAa@mis) of the mind-field
explained in Siitra I.!. Unless the vikyhepas are mastered, the
mind-field cannot progress from wkshipta to the ekagra state be-
cause vikshepa consists of the presence of a variety of vrttis (NBB).
Some of the nine impediments, antardyas, are by themselves
326 SUTRA 1.30

vrttis. VM says this of doubt and of the confusion of philosophies
or viparyaya. It appears, however, that any of the antardyas con-
sisting of a mental state are vrttis. For this purpose they do not
have to have been named in Siitras 1.5 and 1.6 because it was
clarified there that the list was not exclusive; there are not only five
vrttis, but rather innumerable vrttis divided fivefold.

Whether or not an antaraya is a vrtti in itself, other vrttis always
accompany it. In fact these antardyas produce vyrttis, and no vrttis
are produced without them (NBB). Vrttis cease to interrupt the
practice of samadhi as soon as the antardyas are mastered. Then
and only then the mind-field progresses from vikshipta to ekagra.
A few comments on each antaraya need to be included here.

Illness (vyadhi) is the imbalance of dh@tus, rasas and karanas.
The dhdtus are the constituents of the body such as blood, flesh,
bones and so forth. The three humours, namely, air, bile and
phlegm, are also called dhdtus. The rasas are the fluid essences
such as hormones, gastric juices and so forth. Karanas are the
active and cognitive senses, as well as the mind. Their imbalance is
an obstacle in the practice of yoga because the mind reacts to an
illness, and an unbalanced or sick body disturbs meditation in
many ways. It is possible through the practice of japa for the mind
to cease to react to physical illness and not be depressed or other-
wise emotionally troubled by it. Disciplines of diet and regularity
of life habits as well as the practices of hatha-yoga help to purify
the body and bring about restoration of its internal balances so
that discomforts of the body may cease to distract the mind.

There 1s no single English word expressive of sty@na. When the
mind is habituated to restlessness and fickleness, it refuses to settle
down to being applied in a constant manner. It procrastinates,
postpones, finds excuses, does not become fixed on anything for
long. Its capacity for concentration is limited. Even without an
external cause it remains distracted and refuses to work for the
purpose the s@dhaka has set for himself.

Doubt (sammshdya) can exert a strong, adverse effect on the effi-
cacy of yoga (BR, NBB, BM) as taught by the tradition, the texts
and the guru, as well as on one’s own capacity and the possibility
SOTRA 1.30 327
of one’s success (NT). In doubt the mind keeps oscillating between
two possibilities (VM, VB, BG, NB, RY, AD, SS) as to whether
what has been taught is correct or incorrect, and whether one
should undertake to apply it or not. Along with confusion of
philosophies, it is the most difficult adversary in the endeavour to
bring about the nirodha of vrttis (VM).

Negligence (pramd@da) is a failure in the practice of bhdvana
(constantly impressing an experience on the mind through repeated
observance). It can take the form of the arousal of passion, etc.
(NTC) or the failure to gather the sixfold wealth of Shama, dama,
uparati, titiksha, Shraddha and samadhana (NB) (see p. 67). One
fails to pay attention to the observance (VM, BG, AD), remains
disinterested (BR) and especially fails to practise the arigas of yoga
(NTB, RY) such as non-violence and truth (SS) or any other means
of samadhi (NBB, BR, BM).

Sloth (Glasya) is failure at the endeavour owing to heaviness of
the body because of fat, phlegmatic tendencies, etc., and heaviness
of mind because of tamas (VM et al).

Non-abstention (a-virati) is a craving for sense objects. This is
all that the commentators say. In our view this is the opposite of
uparati (see p. 67), which is the first stage of vairdgya. The strong
pull of the senses prevents one from concentrating on the path.

Confusion of philosophies (bhrdanti-darshana) is identified by
Vyasa with viparyaya and should be studied in Sitra 1.8. In this
antar@ya one views a fact as a non-fact (BM), sees what is not
there in any entity (SS), and decides against what has been taught
by the gurus and so forth (VB, NB, NBB, BG). Here there is no
oscillation as with doubt; instead the mind has become settled on
the issue, has taken a side that is in error (NT). In doubt a possi-
bility was allowed that the fact might be accepted as fact; here it
has been totally reyected Together with doubt, this is the most
difficult adversary of the nirodha of vrttis.

A-labdha-bhiimikatva, failure to gain a ground, refers to the
condition in which in spite of much observance one has not yet
reached the plateau of confirmed achievement of a state of con-
sciousness. It may be because the conditions of Sttra 1.14 have not
328 SUTRA 1.30

yet been fully and effectively fulfilled or because one is in the
category of a person of little momentum and lower capacity (per
Stitras 1.21-22). In any case, the progressively higher grounds
(bhamis), the madhumaii, etc., listed on p. 78, are referred to by
all commentators. Unless one has overcome all the previous anta-
rayas, the higher ground is simply not gained.

The same reasons apply to the next antardya, instability (an-
avasthitatva), wherein one gains the higher ground but falls from
it. Unless the anterior ground becomes firm the posterior one re-
mains weak (NT): one reaches the higher state but keeps slipping
from it. It is not enough that one should practise any kind of
samadhi once or twice or a few times and be satisfied by that
experience. The endeavour should continue until asamprajnata be-
comes the normal state, from which one no longer falls.

Once again it should be remembered that this and the next siitra
occur in the context of ishvara-pranidhana. It is through the prac-
tice of the presence of God in japa that all the antardyas are
gradually overcome by the grace of God.
SOTRA 1.31 329
Sitral31  qwardrearyraqacreaqrawrearat
frarTaeya: |
duhkha-daurmanasyangamejayatva-Shvasa-
prashvasa vikshepa-saha-bhuvah
duhkha-: pain
daur-manasya-: frustration, anguish, bad mood, ill-mindedness
angam-ejayatva-: unsteadiness, movement of limbs
Shvasa-: inhalation (and)
pra-shvasah: exhalation (these are)
vikshepa-: of vikshepas, of distractions
saha-bhuvah: natural accompaniments, correlates
Pain, frustration, unsteadiness of limbs, involuntary inhalation
and exhalation—these are the natural accompaniments of dis-
tractions.
Vyasa’s Commentary
Pain (duhkha) is (of three kinds):
adhyatmika: within oneself
a@dhibhautiha. caused by other beings
a@dhidaivika’ caused by deities or natural forces
Pain is that afflicted by which beings endeavour to ward it off
Ill-mindedness (daur-manasya) is the mind's »gitation and an-
guish (kshobha) when a desire is frustrated.
Unsteadiness (angam-ejayatva) is the movement of limbs.
Inhalation (shvdsa) is the prana breathing in external air. Ex-
halation (pra-shvdsa) 1s (the pradna) breathing out visceral air.
These natural accompaniments or correlates of distractions (vik-
Shepas) appear with them and accrue to one whose mind-field is in
the distracted (vikshipta) state. They do not happen to one whose
mind is harmonized in samadhi.
330 SUTRA 131
Discussion

This siitra requires only a few comments.

Duhkha is any kind of pain, grief, sorrow or suffering. It is that
which all beings seek to avoid. It is the first of the fourfold noble
truths of the Buddhist doctrine and the first concern of the Sankhya-
yoga philosophy. Sankhya-karika, the most important Sankhya
text, begins with the statement:

Because one intends to prevent the three kinds of pain, there
arises inquiry as to the means of that prevention.
The same sorrow is spoken of in YS II.16, and YS II.15-26 are
devoted to understanding pain, the cause of pain, the removal of
pain, and the means of removing pain. Whereas the siitras in Chap-
ter 2 deal with the totality of the universal problem of pain, the
connotation of duhkha in this siitra is somewhat limited to the
personal experience of pain. Both universal and personal pain are
experienced from three sources:
1. Adhyatmika: internal to oneself—physical (such as illness)
and mental (such as passions and desires)
2. Adhibhautika: caused by other beings (such as beasts of prey
or one’s enemies)
3 Adhidaivika: caused by planetary influences (NT, RY) and
other natural forces (such as heat, cold, etc.)

Even though all pain is experienced mentally, one attributes it
to various external forces; it is only in this sense that the above
three classifications are made (VB). All of this pain is actually the
mind’s rajasic mutation (BR, AD) and always impedes the practice
of yoga. When it is realized that all pain actually originates and is
experienced in the mind as a correlate of the previous nine obstacles
and the vrttis, then one is in a position to control it mentally. In
spite of the presence of pain, one may elect to suffer it less and
may prevent it from becoming a barrier on the path of yoga.

If the mind in daily life is filled with duhkha, pain of desires, the
mind in meditation remains disturbed (vikshipta) and sattva fails
SUTRA 131 331
to overcome rajas. More about duhkha will be discussed in Chap-
ter 2.

Daurmanasya, literally “bad-mindedness” (from dur ‘bad’ +
manas ‘mind’), is the antonym of a widely used Sanskrit word,
saumanasya, “good-mindedness” (from su ‘good, happy, harmon-
ized’ + manas ‘mind’). Since mental pain (duhkha) is desire, its
product is daurmanasya, frustration, anguish, despair, bad moods,
emotional disturbances and instability. All of these are expressed
together in daurmanasya, ill-mindedness, all the way to psycho-
pathic situations.

If the mind in daily life is filled with daurmanasya, meditation
also remains disturbed (vikshipta).

Angamejayatva, shaking of body and twitching of limbs in med-
itation, is part of the same rajasic tendencies which keep a person
restless and listless in daily life and is caused by emotional instabil-
ity. Without mental stability there can be no stabilisation of the
body in meditation. Unless sattva helps settle one down, this in-
ability to sit still is not brought under control and the posture does
not fulfil the requirements ( YS I1.46) of steadiness and comfort.

Shvasa and pra-shvdsa, involuntary inhalation and exhalation,
are the well-known symptoms of mental and emotional distur-
bance. They are the opposite of the total control of pranayama
described in YS I1.49-53. Involuntary inhalation is the opposite of
piuraka, the pranayama of controlled inhalation. Involuntary exhal-
ation is the opposite of rechaka, the pranayama of controlled ex-
halation. Without this control the ultimate natural préndyamas of
YS 11.50-51 cannot be accomplished. In daily life this symptom of
a disturbed mind is seen in gasping, sighing and such. The same
mental conditions cause the breath to flow unevenly and in jerks
during meditation. Until the breath flows smoothly and evenly
without jerks or pauses during meditation, it should be understood
that desire and frustrations (duhkha and daurmanasya) are present.

All five symptoms are correlates of the nine obstacles (antardyas)
and should be seen as five aspects of a single condition, that of a
personality disturbed both in life and in meditation. These five
aspects have to be cured altogether. Only then does vikshipta
332 SUTRA 1.31

progress to ekagra (Sitra I.1). Vyasa states clearly that these symp-
toms accrue to one whose mind-field is in the distracted (vikshipta)
state; they do not happen to one whose mind is harmonized in
samadhi.

The word samahita means “harmonized; that in which conditions
of conflict have been resolved, as though previously broken pieces
have been set and fused together” (from sam + @ + dha ‘to set
together, join together’ [as of broken bones]); and “that which is in
samadhi.” The two, again, are actually one condition. From sam +
a+ dha, “samadhi” is the abstract noun and samG4hita is the perfect
participle expressing the fact that this harmonizing, resolving, of
the conditions of conflict has been accomplished by reaching
samadhi. Only then are the nine impediments and their five corre-
lates overcome.
SOTRA 1.32 333
Sitral32 wentavardawacarera:!
tat-pratishedhartham eka-tattvabhydsah
tat-: those
pratishedha-: prevention, opposing, For the purpose
prohibiting, negating, voiding, of negating those
nullifying (antarayas and their
artham: for the purpose of companions)
eka-: one
tattva-: principle, factor, reality, real element
abhydsah: practice

To prevent and negate those impediments, the distractions and

their correlates, the practice of a single reality, one principle, is

enjoined, prescribed.
Vyasa’s Commentary

Now, these distractions, being the adversaries of samadhi, should
be brought under control by the same practice and dispassion
(abhyasa and vairdgya) (which have been explained). Of those, to
sum up the topic of practice (abhydsa), he ( Patafijali) says

[Surra: ] To prevent and negate those impediments, the distrac-
tions and their correlates, the practice of a single reality, one
principle, 1s enjoined, prescribed.

For preventing and negating the distractions (vikshepas) one
should make a practice of the mind-field’s resorting to a single
reality or one principle alone.

For someone who holds the opinion that chitta is distinct and
limited only to each experienced factor, comprises only a single
cognition and is momentary, then that entire chitta 1s already one-
pointed (ekagra) and 1s never and not at all distracted (vikshipta).
If, however, it is gathered together from all over, withdrawn from
there and placed into samadhi on a single matter (artha) and there-
by becomes one-pointed (ekagra), then it is not, cannot be con-
sidered to be, limited only to a given object.
334 SUTRA 1.32

If someone believes that the mind is one-pointed when it is
flowing along similar cognitions and that this one-pointedness is
an attribute of the flowing mind-stream, then at the same time
there could be no such mind-stream, the chitta being momentary
in this view. If, however, it is an attribute of that single cognition
which is a part of the flowing stream, the mind being confined to a
single experienced factor, it will be one-pointed all the same
whether flowing along similar cognitions or dissimilar ones. Then
it would be inappropriate to postulate a distracted mind. Therefore
we must conclude that there is only one mind conditioned towards
many factors of experience, changing in condition according to
each of the many purposes.

Furthermore, if the cognitions arise that are by nature distinct
and not associated with a single mind-field, how is it possible that
one should remember a cognition experienced by some other?
And, how is it possible that one cognition should experience (the
results of) the domain of karmas gathered by some other? No
matter how one tries to reconcile this, still the analogy of the cow
dung and the milk pudding applies. Not only this, but if we adhere
to the separateness of chittas, one’s own experience has to be
disowned. How? “I am touching what I saw”; “I am seeing the

. same thing that I] touched”—such cognition is present as the non-
distinction of the cognizer when all the cognitions are separate and
distinct. If all the chittas were completely distinct, how could this
idea, the subject of a single cognition, persist and substrate in one
common cognizer as “I am a nondistinct, undivided self’? And this
cognition that “I am a nondistinct, undivided self” is grasped and
proved by one’s own experience. Nor can the power of direct
experience (pratyaksha) be overwhelmed by any other proof. Any
other proof, however, becomes effective only on the strength of
direct perception.

Therefore, we conclude, the mind-field is one and conditioned
to many factors of experience, constant, yet changing its condition
to serve many purposes with regard to many objects.

Discussion

Are these distractions overcome only by the practice of the pres-

ence of God as has been stated in Siitra 1.29? The answer appears
SOTRA 1.32 335
to be that ishvara-pranidhdana precludes the arising of distractions.
One who practises the presence of God is naturally free of these
distractions (NB). But one who cannot fully succeed in pranidhana
requires the aid of another practice (NB). Once the distractions do
arise, the only resort is the practice (VB).

There still appears to be a contradiction between Sitra 1.29 and
this one. Some commentators (VM, RY, SS, BM) resolve it by
saying that, in Vyasa’s phrase, /

a practice of the mind-field’s resorting to a single reality or one

principle alone
means, again, iShvara-pranidhana. God (ishvara) is that reality,
that principle whose presence is practised. Others (VB, NBB) are
of the opinion that it refers to the gross elements, etc. that are
progressively the objects of concentration in the various samadhis
discussed in Sitra I.17. Yet others (BR, NTB) say that one may
practise concentration on any object of one’s choice (abhimata)
(BG, NB). But this last interpretation of the siitra would render
Sitra 1.39 redundant.

The correct interpretation of the siitra would reconcile the vari-
ous views. If one could successfully maintain the practice of the
presence of God, the vikshepas would not arise. It was stated in
the previous siitra that these vikshepas occur to one whose mind-
field is distracted (vikshipta) and not to one whose mind is har-
monized in samadhi. However, it is not possible for a large majority
to maintain this presence fully and all the time. To arrive at the
practice of the presence of God, most seekers require going through
other practices, starting from concentration on gross elements in
sa-vitarka samadhi. Even when one comes to ishvara-pranidhana,
this itself requires continuously directing the mind towards God
until one maintains himself in the great presence. Furthermore
(HA), 1n the beginning of ishvara-pranidhana the mind wanders to
all the different notions concerning the attributes of God: His
omnipresence, kindness, love, etc. Here, again, the mind must be
withdrawn from all these notions and trained to maintain only the
awareness of a single reality, the One Principle, God alone. -
336 SUTRA 1.32

In this context it must be made clear that only until one actually
reaches the presence of God are there various notions to which
followers of different credos try to remain loyal and about which
others merely speculate. When God is experienced, however, it is
found that none of these notions is accurate. God is not at all as
He is thought to be; the experience of the One Reality (eka-tattva)
is entirely apart from all ideas which were held before.

Vyasa says:

Now, these distractions, being the adversaries of samadhi, should
be brought under control by the same practice and dispassion
(abhydsa and vairagy.a) (which have been explained). Of those, to
sum up the topic of practice (abhy@sa) [this siitra is taught].

In other words the topic of abhyasa that was begun in Sitra
1.12 is now summed up and concluded here. Since Siitra I.12 had
made abhydasa and vairdgya associates (saha-karin), Vyasa includes
vairdgya here in his comment even though it is not found in the
stitra itself (VM). Vairagya is not out of place here, as that topic
still continues through all these siitras and is concluded in Sitra
1.40. In everything stated from Sitra 1.12 up to here, abhydsa and
vairdgya remain the necessary accompaniment and condition, an
aid to everything, a precondition for all realizations. Furthermore,
just as abhydsa 1s accompanied with vairagya in this sitra without
the latter’s being mentioned specifically, abhvasa will continue to
accompany vairadgya up to Sitra 1.40 even though the topic of
abhyasa as a primary factor 1s being brought to conclusion here.
Such are always the implications in the way the siitras are organized.

Here Vy4sa challenges the Buddhist view of mind. In this, espe-
cially in vijfid@na-vada, the theory of “ideation only,” no external
objects exist. Only idea (visfidna) arises as an error from within. A
corollary to this view 1s kshanika-vada, the theory of momentari-
ness. All ideas exist for a moment only. Any continuity that ap-
pears is merely a string of independent ideas arising one after
another and subsisting for a moment only. Consequently, there
does not exist an entity called the mind. The ideation at each
moment brings into existence the mind (chitta) of that moment,
SOTRA 1.32 337
which immediately upon the expiration of that moment, ceases.
Thus nothing is permanent, nothing lasts more than a moment.
Vyasa challenges this view, constructing his argument on the basis
that the Buddhist also believes that the mind is distracted, and
needs to be brought to one-pointedness. Vyasa’s argument may be
paraphrased briefly as follows. If the mind is momentary and exists
only for the duration of a single, momentary ideation or cognition
thereof, then obviously for that moment the mind remains one-
pointed on that idea or cognition. Immediately after that moment
the said cognition, idea and the mind vanish and some other cogni-
tion, idea and the mind arise. This next momentary mind also is
one-pointed with reference to that cognition and idea in relation to
which it has come into being. Where then is there any distraction
from which the Buddhist wishes to lead the mind into one-pointed-
ness?

The Buddhist might defend himself by saying that his definition
of one-pointedness is that at each moment in each successive
momentary mind a similar ideation and the cognition thereof
should occur. This is based on the notion of pravaha-chitta, a
flowing mind, the mind-stream in which each successive wave
causes the appearance of continuity even though there is ao stream
by itself, only the succession of waves. When the waves arising in
each successive moment are dissimilar, the mind-stream is con-
sidered distracted and when they are similar, it is one-pointed. °
Vyasa challenges this definition. Whether the successive cognitions
and ideas arising with each momentary mind are similar or dissimi-
lar is irrelevant since the Buddhists do not believe that there is a
single continuous mind at all. This brings us back to the implication
that each momentary mind is already concentrated on its relevant
idea and cognition. There is no distraction at all, and that being
so, what other sam@dhi can there be for the Buddhist?

Vyasa, therefore, refutes the entire notion of the succession of
momentary minds. If there 1s no single, continuous mind-field, and
each cognition and each successive mind is distinct and separate,
how is it possible that we remember anything at all? Only a single,
continuous mind can be a repository of memories. If one Chaitra
338 SUTRA 132
memorizes the scriptures, it is not someone named Maitra who
remembers them! How can one momentary mind remember some-
thing that transpired in and expired with another momentary mind,
a million moments—or even a single, contiguous moment—ago?
Also, without a single, continuous entity can there be any kind of
effectiveness in the world? Can the mere idea of a momentary fire
warm our hands? Again, if the idea of momentary minds were
taken seriously, the entire doctrine of karma and its fruition would
fall into dire straits. Since in this view there is no continuous mind
and no continuous personality, who gathers the karmas and who
deposits them in the karmashaya, the repository or domain of the
karmas? Yet again, how can one independent, momentary mind be
responsible for, suffer or enjoy the karmas gathered by a million
other momentary minds? It sounds like the analogy of the milk
pudding and the cow dung, which goes as follows:

All that a cow produces is milk.

Milk pudding is produced from the (milk of a) cow.

Cow dung 1s produced from a cow.

Therefore, milk pudding and cow dung are one and the same!
That is to say, in the Buddhist view there appears to be no cause
and effect relationship between the successive, momentary minds
nor between the karma of a preceding one and the pain-pleasure
fruition thereof in a subsequent one. Yet, both are in a single
substratum, in a single personality. What exactly is that person-
ality? Merely the process of unbroken succession? A process such
as succession by itself is nothing concrete, not a substance nor an
entity. How can the succession by itself perform karma, gather it
and enjoy or suffer its consequence? The whole argument is even
more fallacious than the analogy of milk pudding and cow dung
(VM). The Buddhist thinks that the cow named “Succession” pro-
duces both karmas and their results!

The Buddhist view, says Vydsa, contradicts all personal experi-
ence. By experience we know, for example, “I am touching exactly
the object I previously saw,” or “What I touched is what | am
seeing now.” We see that the cognitions “object,” “touching,” and
SUTRA 1.32 339
“seeing” are each separate and distinct, but they unite in the single
cognizer. By this experience we know “I am an undifferentiated,
continuous, single entity.” How could this experience occur if there
were only distinct, momentary minds?

Experience is the supreme arbiter, the highest proof. The validity
of all other proofs is derived from that of direct experience (pra-
tyaksha) which alone renders them effective. On the basis of our
experience we know that the mind-field is a single, continuous
entity, constant through the changing cognitions, yet undergoing a
variety of conditions to serve many purposes with regard to many
objects.

Vyasa’s word ava-sthitam is loaded with meaning. On one hand
it means “constant, stable.” On the other, it is derived from ava +
stha, “to go through a process or condition.” The mind is a single
constant but passes through many conditions, aneka-artham, “to
serve many purposes (arthas) with regard to many objects (arthas).”
This mind is to be brought under control, freed from obstacles and
their correlates, through the practice of concentration on a single
principle alone.
340 SOTRA 1.33
Sitral33  *ehrewurafadreann qaq-w-
PATTI AAA A LTATA TAT |
maitri-karuna-muditopekshanam sukha-duhkha-
punyapunya-vishayanam bhavanatash
chitta-prasddanam
mautri-: (of) amity, love
karuna-: compassion
mudita-: joyfulness, gladness, and
upekshanam: of indifference, equanimity
suhka-: (of) pleasure, comfort; those comfortable
duhkha-: pain, sorrow, suffering; those suffering
punya-: virtue, merit, virtuousness, meritoriousness; the virtuous
and meritorious (and)
a-punya-: vice, nonvirtue, nonvirtuousness, nonmeritoriousness;
the nonvirtuous and nonmeritorious
vishayanaém: in relation with, with regard to
bhavanatah: through cultivating, by impressing into (upon) one-
self
chitta-: (of) mind-field
pra-sddanam: purifying, rendering clear, making happy, making
serene, pleasing, making pleasant
By cultivating and impressing into oneself the sentiments of
amity and love, compassion, gladness, and indifference with re-
gard to those comfortable, those suffering, the virtuous and the
non-virtuous (respectively), the mind is purified and made
pleasant.
Vyasa’s Commentary
That mind-field the purification (parikarman) of which 1s advised
by the Scripture—how is that?
[Sarra:] By cultivating and impressing into oneself the sentiments
of amity and love, compassion, gladness, and indifference with
regard to those comfortable, those suffering, the virtuous and the
nonvirtuous (respectively), the mind is purified and made pleasant
SUTRA 133 341
Of these, one should cultivate amity towards all living beings who
are endowed with comfort and pleasures, compassion towards those
who are suffering, gladness towards those of virtuous nature and
indifference towards (those of) nonvirtuous disposition. As one
cultivates himself thus, his white nature increases, grows. Then the
mind is purified and becomes pleasant. Purified and pleasant, it
attains the state of one-pointed stability.
Discussion

Sitra 1.20 enumerated the various methods (updyas) for perfect-
ing yoga. The topic of their practice (abhydsa) was brought to
summation in the last siitra. The subject of the highest kind of
lower dispassion (apara-vairdgya), called vashikara, was introduced
in SUtra 1.15 and will be brought to conclusion in Sitra 1.40. Both
abhydsa and vairdgya, however, are interdependent, and since the
consideration in the sitras is never confined to either one exclu-
sively, the two topics weave in and out of the discussion.

It is understood that the mind-field must become one-pointed
(ekdgra) to experience samadhi. The five methods of faith and the
other four updyas stated in Sitra 1.20 are the prerequisite means
for attaining one-pointedness (VB) and samprajfidta samadhi (SS),
but success in the practice of these is blocked and the mind cannot
reach one-pointedness if it is filled with undesirable sentiments
such as intolerance and jealousy (asiiva) (VM, RY). For this reason
one seeks to purify the mind and to make it pleasant. This can be
done only by warding off the blocks of negative emotions by estab-
lishing the controls of vashikara (Sitras 1.15, 1.40). Otherwise the
sentiments of jealousy and so forth continue to destabilise the
mind no matter how much the five updyas are practised. The
practices described in Sitras 1.33-39 provide a way to attain final
control (vashikdra). Siitra 1.35 uses the term sthiti-nibandhana,
which means not merely “stabilising” but “rendering (that stability)
permanent, unshakable; making (it) binding and fastening (it).”
That term is synonymous with chitta-prasadana ‘purifying the mind
and making it pleasant’, as it occurs here (BG, NB, NBB). Let us
summarize the above approach as follows:
342 SUTRA 1.33

«Samadhi being synonymous with yoga, its lower stage, known as
samprajfidta, can be attained only when the mind is made one-
pointed (ekagra).

« Through practice of the five updyas stated in Sitra 1.20 the mind
is made ekagra. This practice (abhydsa) (YS 1.12) must be under-
taken together with dispassion (vairadgya), the highest level of
which is the final control (vashik@ra) (YS 1.15).

«Though abhydsa is defined (1.13) as the endeavour to make the
mind stable, one fails to maintain such stability because the un-
desirable sentiments such as jealousy and intolerance keep inter-
vening.

«SUtras I.33-39 explain the ways to make that stability permanent
(1.35), which is the same as purifying the mind and making it
pleasant (chitta-prasddana) in the current siitra.

The way to purify the mind, to make it pleasant and perma-
nently stable, so that one-pointedness of samprajfdta may become
the yogi’s natural state, is to impede and counteract the force of
the undesirable and destructive sentiments by cultivating, imprint-
ing upon the mind, developing, the bhdvand of the positive senti-
ments described in this siitra. The practices spoken of in Siitras
1.33-39 are in general called pari-karman or pari-karma (ways of
adorning, polishing, preparing, training the mind). The primary
four parikarmas are stated in this stitra. The Buddhist tradition
also refers to them as parikarmas or brahma-vihara (frolicking in
Brahman). Parikarman is actually a supportive act in any science
(BR). It is also like polishing, seasoning, giving a final protective
or enhancing touch that prevents deterioration.

This purification of mind means abolishing the dark stains and
taints (BG, NB) such as attachments and aversions (raga and dvesha)
(BG, BN); transgressions, evil acts, sin (papa) (BG, NB, SS); meri-
torious acts, virtue (punya) (SS); jealousy (irshya) (NB); malice
(asiiya) (NB); and intolerance (amarsha) (NB).

The dichotomies of attachments and aversions, virtue and sin,
Stain the mind (SS). Attachments and aversions are the primary
agents of sullying the mind (BR). If these two can be eradicated,
then the mind becomes pleasant and consequently one-pointed (BR).
The antidotes to these sullying sentiments are the four right atti-
tudes described in this stra.
SOTRA 1.33 343

The siitra provides therapeutic prescriptions, antidotes, for the

poisons of negative sentiments. In following these prescriptions
one learns to replace rajasic and tamasic vrttis with sattvic ones,
starting with maitri, known in Buddhism as merrd in the Pali
language. Maitri is sauharda (VM, VB, BR, NB, AD, NT, BM),
eucardia or goodheartedness, amity, friendship. It is not affection,
because affection binds (BM) instead of freeing an individual. This
becomes clear when one understands jealousy (irshya) (VM, HA,
BR, NT, NBB, BM) and other sentiments such as the inability to
acknowledge others’ good qualities (asiiyd) (i.e., being fault-finding)
and small-mindedness in general (m@tsarya). These various mala-
dies have been included by different commentators. Jealousy (irshyda)
is closely coupled with attachment (raga). Raga is not merely an
attachment to something specific but a certain general tendency of
the mind which gives rise to specific attachments. One broods
upon pleasures one has experienced in dreams or has heard of or
seen elsewhere. But when the tangible or the intangible means of
fulfilling the desire for the objects of attachment are not available,

this rajasic vrtti or raga darkens the mind (SS). To ward off this

vrtti one cultivates the sentiment of friendship even towards malev-

olent beings who are enjoying comfort and happiness. Let one be

happy at their happiness as though they were all one’s friends

(HA). Let one think that all these beings and people are one’s own

(SS). As their happiness thus becomes one’s own the darkness of

raga vanishes (SS), and all the other attendant weaknesses listed

above also drop off.

Karund, compassion, is the desire to remove the pain of others
as if it were one’s own (VM, BM), with the constant thought as to
how their pain may be reduced or removed (BR, BM). This must
be an unconditional sentiment (VB, BG, NB, NBB) towards friend
or foe (HA). This prevents the desire to hurt others (BM) and the
pride that develops at seeing oneself comfortable while others are
in suffering (SS). When fully cultivated, this virtue of compassion
wards off hatred (dvesha) (SS).

One should cultivate joyfulness at seeing others virtuous, con-
senting to and rejoicing at their virtue (BM). Whether they are
one’s equals or unequals in virtue, one should always be happy at
344 SUTRA 1.33

seeing, hearing or remembering the good deeds performed by them
(HA) and not belittle their goodness (BR). Beings often incline
towards evil and away from good. Then this conflict of good and
evil causes pashchat-tapa. Pashchat-tapa is a very common term in
Indian teachings of ethics. Literally, it means “afterwards (pashchdat)
burning (tdpa).” This “burning” within oneself “after” the fact of
an evil deed is very desirable if it leads to a redemption in the
future. It is a defeatist guilt feeling if it does not lead to the vow of
self-purification. When one rejoices at the good acts of others, the
imprint created on the mind leads to purification and enhances
one’s own inclination towards virtue. This gladness saves one from
tendencies to commit evil, and also serves as an antidote to the
internal burning of pashchat-tdpa.

Towards the nonvirtuous, those who are not one’s equals (HA),
one cultivates upekshd or indifference, that is, a sense of neutrality
(audasinya) (VB, BR, BG, NB, NBB), which is the middle way
(VB, RY, BM), so that one neither consents to their acts nor feels
hatred or condemnation (BR, BM, HA). This serves as an antidote
to intolerance (amarsha) (VM, NT, BM). One cultivating indiffer-
ence towards the nonvirtuous himself turns away from evil and,
again, frees himself from burning in pashchat-tapa.

Thus the sattvic vrttis replace rajasic and tamasic ones. Without
cultivating these four parrkarmas of amity, compassion, gladness
and indifference, the five upadyas mentioned in Sitra 1.20 do not
stabilise (VM) and the practitioner continues to totter. Vyasa says:

As one cultivates himself thus, his white nature increases, grows.
Then the mind ts purified and becomes pleasant Purified and
pleasant, it attains the state of one-pointed stability.
Cultivating these attributes, one develops a fresh mental personality
in which one’s “white nature” has gathered strength, upa-jan ‘in-
creased, grown’. This sentence of Vydsa’s will be more clearly un-
derstood with reference to Siitra IV.7:
The action, karma, of a yogi is non-white and non-black; of
others, however, it is of three kinds.
SOTRA 1.33 345
On that sitra, Vyasa explains:

The species called karma is four-footed. (Karma may be) black,
white and black, white, or neither white nor black. The black one
1s of the wicked. The white and black is effected through external
means so that the domain of karma is strengthened by hurting
and helping others. The white belongs to those who practise
ascetic endeavour (fapas), japa and self-study (svadhyd@ya) and
meditation (dhyana). This extends in the mind alone and because
it is not dependent on any externals, it is accomplished without
hurting others. The neither white nor black belongs to the renun-
ciates.. .

A person who needs to cultivate the parikarmas, the attributes
of amity and so forth, is not yet a full yogi or renunciate. There is
yet in him a conflict between black and white. By cultivating these
attitudes, he reduces the strength of the black sentiments which
impede his progress and he strengthens the white characteristics of
a meditator, the habits of tapas, sva@dhyaya, and dhyana. He is yet
at the seventh ariga (See YS 11.29) and has not reached yoga, that
is, samadhi. By constant practice of the four parikarmas he be-
comes pleasant-minded so that ugly thoughts of jealousy, hatred,
intolerance, etc. no longer arise in his life or in his meditation.
This then leads to firming up, sealing, the stability of his mind.
Only then does his mind cease to be distracted (vikshipta) and
attain to one-pointedness (ekdgra) that abides undisturbed and
uninterrupted. Such a one-pointed mind enters samadhi.

Sitra I11.23 gives the effects (siddhis) that accrue from the prac-
tice of these brahma-viharas. A distinction is made, however, be-
tween the first three that do lead to samadhi and the fourth one,
indifference (upekshd), which is neutral with regard to attainment
of samadhi since it is not a positive cultivation of any given concen-
tration or attitude.
346 SUTRA 1.34
Sitral34 weodatetarcoreat ar wren
prachchhardana-vidharanabhyam va pranasya
prachchhardana-: (by) explusion, exhalation
vidhéranabhyam: and restraint, control
va: or
pranasya: of prana
Or, by exhalation and restraint of breath and prdna (mind’s
stability is established).
Vyasa’s Commentary
A careful expulsion of the visceral air through the nostrils is
prachchhardana. Vidharana is the expansion of breath and prana
(prana + dyama). Also through these one should effect stability of
the mind.
Discussion
Now that the mind has been purified, pacified and made pleasant,
naturally the next step is to affirm its stability (RY). In most
commentaries and translations the word vd is indicated to mean
the optional “or,” which would imply that the practice of breath
control is an alternative to the four parikarmas prescribed in the
last sitra. The commentators are agreed that this would not be
true to the intent of the sitra. They are, therefore, of the opinion
that this siitra does not take the anuvrtt: of chitta-prasadanam
from the preceding sitra, and that this is a case of anuvrtti in
reverse, drawing here the words sthiti-nibandhani from the next
sutra (VB, BM), so that this sitra begins the topic of firming up
the stability of the mind, with va expressing an optional method
for effecting the same. These methods are described in Sitras 34-
39. This is definitely Vyasa’s opinion. The option expressed by vd,
therefore, is not meant as an alternative to the four parikarmas;
they must be practised for the purification of mind as per Sitra 33
(RY, BM) even as one embarks on effecting the mind’s stability, as
per Sitras 34-39. It was explained in the last siitra that without
SOTRA 1.34 347
mental purity and pleasantness, chitta-prasddana (Sttra 1.33), it is
not possible to effect stability of the mind, sthiti-nibandhana (Sitras
1.34-39), which alone leads to the one-pointed (ekdgra) state so
that samprajfiata samadhi may ensue. VB, BG, and NB contradict
Vyasa in thinking that the pranayama prescribed here first leads to
prasadana and then to nibandhana. However, these and other com-
mentators agree in stating that chitta-prasddana is the essential
prerequisite to any attempt at or method for sthiti-nibandhana
(NB, RY, BM).

The next issue needing clarification is the subject of pran@yama
being introduced in this siitra. Many commentators are confused
as to why pranayama is prescribed here when it is also discussed in
greater detail in Sitras I1.49-53. Since the siitra system requires the
utmost economy of words, it is not the custom of the sages to
indulge in repetition. It is clear then that what is prescribed here
will not be repeated in later siitras describing pranayama.

In this context special attention needs to be paid to the unusual
terms prachchhardana and vidhadrana used in this sitra. These
terms are not commonly found in the texts and passages on prana-
yama and are most probably expressive of some method not in-
cluded in Sitras 1].49-53. The commentators who have failed to
notice this (VB, BR, NT, BG, NB et al.) have interpreted prach-
chhardana as the familiar exhalation of visceral air. Similarly, vi-
dharana is interpreted by them as the ordinary retention (kum-
bhaka). In other words they have tried to read in this stitra the
same rechaka, piiraka and kumbhaka pranayamas described else-
where. Others (BR, NT) see in prachchhardana a measured breath-
ing pattern, even to the ratio (SS) of 16:32:64, performing perhaps
the nddi-Shodhana pranayama using one nostril at a time (VB, NT,
SS), while others see vidhdrana as retention of exhaled breath
outside (NT) or after inhalation (VB, BR, BG, NB, NBB). Clearly,
these commentators are reading here the techniques they know of.
Only two commentators (VM, BM) seem to have an idea of the
simple and effective technique that is actually meant to be con-
veyed. VM (echoed by BM) says:
348 SOTRA 1.34
Prachchhardana is explained: it is whereby the visceral air is
slowly exhaled through the nostrils with a particular care, effort
and method (prayatna) as taught in the yoga science (yoga-
Shastra). . .. Vidharana is stretching or expanding (@yama) of
the visceral air, that is, maintaining it outside, and not a quick or
sudden (sahas@) intake.

The technique is similar to what is known among the Buddhists as
Gnapana-sati, or among the Himalayan yogis as breath awareness.
It involves a slow exhalation and inhalation and training oneself
not to allow a sudden, quick and jerky inhalation. The slow exhala-
tion is prachchhardana, and the careful, slow inhalation is vid-
harana. The term vidhérana not only means controlling the flow of
breath but also suggests the sixth anga of yoga, called dhdrana
(mental attention). The mind should be attentive to the flow of
breath and observe it as is taught in the Himalayan tradition as
well as throughout the Buddhist world. The verb root meaning of
vidharana, “to hold or restrain,” here does not indicate the well-
known practice of retention of breath but refers to holding a
steady flow, restraining it to prevent the sudden and jerky intake
that often occurs. This practice is the antidote to Shvdsa and
prashv4sa, uncontrolled inhalation and exhaltion, which are two
of the correlates of the vikshepas (YS 1.31).3! To anyone expe-
rienced in this type of practice the term “visceral air” (kaushthya

. vayu) suggests the diaphragmatic breathing which is the funda-
mental method of breathing in all yoga practice.

° The personality and the body (VM and BM) become lighter by

such practice, and then the mind naturally gains steadiness and
stability. In the entire yoga system there 1s no other breathing
practice equal to this. All other practices are variations on this
one. Only if this is mastered can the rest be undertaken. It may be
done with japa of the mantra and with mind concentration di-
rected to any one spot or a chakra.
31 Itas worth observing that where the lack of breath control 1s described as a symptom of
mental distraction (wikshepa) the words used tor inhalation and exhalation are Shvdsa and
prathvdsa expressive only of the physical aspects of breath In this sitra, where concentra-
tion and awareness are emphasized, the word used 1s prana
SUTRA 134 349
Since the entire tradition states that prdndydama is the best way
to burn dross from the mind and cleanse it of stains, strains, sin
and evil (papa), it is consistent that with this practice the mind
should become stabilised (NTB). The Lawbovk of Manu (V.72)
states:
As the impurities of minerals are burnt off by being smelted,
so the corruptions of the senses are burnt through
control of breath and prana.
One should burn the impurities by the pradzdvamas,
the sins by the practices of dhdrand,
by pratyahara the attractions of senses, and
by meditation the ungodly attributes.
NB quotes from an unknown source:
The pranas are the force of the senses; by controlling them with
effort the heaps of impurities of the senses that are the causes of
distractions (wikshepas) are burnt.
All the operations of the senses are dependent on the operations of
prana; therefore the contro! of breath and prada calms the senses.
Because the activities of the mind and prada are intertwined,
when the prana is made lighter and subtler, the senses are controlled
and finally the mind-field becomes one-pointed (BR). SS quotes
the Yoga-vasishtha:
That which 1s the vibration of the prdna and air is the same as
the vibration of the mind-field Therefore a wise man should
make great effort towards the diminution of the vibration of
prana.
“Diminution” here assuredly means making the prdna vibration
subtler by refining the breath. This is the intent of the sitra. The
topic of effecting the mind’s stability continues in the forthcoming
sutras.
350 SOTRA 1.35
Sitral35 faaaadt ar wafeecoa aaa: feafe-
fraeerth
vishayavati va pravrttir utpanna manasah
sthiti-nibandhani
vishayavati: having sense objects, having sense experiences
va@: or, also
pravrttih: inclination, manifestation, direct perception,
apprehension
utpanna: born, appeared, occurred, become manifest, an advent
having taken place
manasah: mind’s °
sthiti-: (of) stability, steadiness
ni-bandhani: that which binds, fastens, firmly establishes, seals

The advent of direct perception of the experiences of subtle or

celestial sense objects is called vishayavati pravytti, which also

firmly establishes the stability of the mind.
Vyasa’s Commentary

The apprehension of celestial fragrance that occurs when one
holds the mind at the front point of the nostrils is called the
manifestation of smell, gandha-pravrtti. The apprehension of taste
occurs at the tip of the tongue, the apprehension of form at the
palate, the apprehension of touch at the mid-tongue and the appre-
hension of sound at the root of the tongue. It is thus that the
occurrence of these manifestations fastens the mind-field into sta-
bility, blows away doubt and becomes the gateway to the wisdom
of samadhi. By these examples one should consider included the
manifestation that occurs (through concentration) on the moon,
the sun, planets, jewels, a candle, rays and so forth.

Even though it is true that the fact of the matter comprehended
fiom the texts of particular sciences, inferential processes and the
teachings of the Gcharyas indeed becomes real because they ex-
pound the matter exactly as it is, yet, so long as at least some one
part is not experienced directly with one’s own instrumentation,
everything is invisible and as though absent. That fails to produce
SOTRA 13S) 3581
a firm belief in the subtle facts such as the summum bonum
(apavarga). Therefore, in order to reinforce (the conclusions drawn
from) the Scripture, inference and the teachings of the achdryas, it
is necessary that something specific be experienced directly. In
that, when a fact which is one part of the teachings of those has
become the subject of direct experience, then the very subtle matter
all the way up to the final liberation (apavarga) is easily accepted
on faith.

It is for such purpose that this refining (parikarman) of the
mind-field is directed, so that when there has occurred what is
defined as total mastery (vashikdra) with regard to the indeter-
minate fluctuations, vrttis and their objects, the mind-field should
become fit for and capable of the direct experience of the given
matter.

And when this has happened for one, the faith (shraddhda),
vigour (virya), mindfulness (smrti) and harmony (samadhi) will
develop for him without an obstruction.

Discussion

Vyasa’s commentary on this sitra is very clear and requires little
elaboration. This siitra explains that the experiences of (a) the
individual subtle body and (+) its universal extension, the celestial
world, consist of the realization of the subtle elements (tan-mdatras)
well known to students of the SAnkhya-yoga philosophical system.
Even though the detailed methods are to be taught in Chapter 3, a
glimpse is given here. By way of an illustration, concentration on
various parts helps gain entry into different powers of the subtle
body and the celestial world, resulting in certain extrasensory per-
ceptions. These may be listed as follows:

«where the center base, the septum, of the nose joins the upper

lip: celestial smell

*at the tip of the tongue: celestial tastes

*1n the palate: celestial forms and visions

sat the mid-point of the tongue: celestial touch

*at the root of the tongue: celestial sounds
352, SOTRA 1.35

Other experiences occur when one concentrates on the moon, the
sun, planets, gems, a candle flame, rays and so on. Even though all
translators translate nasagra as the tip of the nose, I follow the
practical instructions given by my master and translate the phrase
as the spot where the center of the nose just ends and the upper lip
begins.

We concur with HA(E) concerning the rationale for these prac-
tices and quote him:

The optic nerve is situated above the palate. On the tongue the

sense of touch is most developed. The root of the tongue is
closely related to the ear for purposes of articulation. Therefore,
concentration on these points develops a finer power of percep-
tion of the sense organs.
Through these practices, which must be undertaken for a long
period of time with perfect intensity, one becomes master of the
specific elements within the subtle body (visheshas), for which see
Sttra 11.19.

The word pravrtti has many meanings. Here it is used in the
sense of pra-vrtti, an intense vrtti of the mind-field, one that re-
mains in concentration, unlike those which appear and disappear
fleetingly. The word pravrtt: also means “a natural urge, inclination
or tendency.” In the context of this stitra and the next, when such
a concentration is so fully mastered that the intense vrtti and the
attendant inner experience manifest effortlessly and become a
natural inclination, then it is called a pravrtt. Perfecting any such
concentration finally changes the mind’s habit of wandering, and
then the mind can easily be applied to a higher and more worth-
while pursuit. In other words the experiences are only a by-product
of the concentrations; the actual purpose is to train the mind, to
habituate it to stability.

The use of the word karanas significant. Sva-karana-samvedya
has been translated as

experienced directly with one’s own instrumentation.
Karanas are senses, including the antah-karana (the inner mental
instrument). In practices of this nature it is the subtle senses and
SUTRA 1.35 353
their subtle objects such as the internal faculty of smell, etc. that
are brought under control of the mind. The instrumentation for
the entire process of concentrations is meant here by the word
karana.

For the mind to be able to experience and withstand the explo-
sion of power that occurs and to be able to direct and channel it
after such experiences, it is essential that the mind be made samar-
tha ‘strong and capable’, the term used by Vyasa. This means that
the mind’s power of concentration must be intensified and its
capacity increased. Its s@marthya, increased capacity, shows itself
in the yogi’s daily life and acts, as well as in the duration, depth
and intensity of concentration.

Vyasa says that success in such concentrations, which shows
itself by way of the extrasensory experiences, then

(1) fastens the mind-field into stability,

(2) blows away doubt, and

(3) becomes the gateway to the wisdom of samadhi.

The wisdom of samadhi is inherent in the term prajfa that occurs
as part of the word sam-prajfid-ta, which was explained in Sitra
1.17. In other words, these experiences indicate the lower states of
samprajfiata samadhi. The beginning of this wisdom is in the
upayas of Sitra 1.20 and the culmination is in the Truth-bearing
wisdom of Siitra 1.48, which will be elucidated there.

Are these experiences not detrimental to spiritual awakening, as
will be stated.in YS 111.37? Vyasa implies that they could be detri-
mental if one had no higher goal. On the other hand, they can be
supportive of the higher goal. When, from sources such as

(a) texts and scriptures,

(5) one’s own rational analysis, and

(c) the teachings of the sages and teachers,
one has learned of that higher goal called apavarga ‘deliverance,
the Supreme Good’, there nonetheless yet lingers a doubt about
the reality of any existence subtler than that of the gross physical
elements which are the objects of our daily, direct experience,
354 SUTRA 1.35

pratyaksha. That pratyaksha proof, defined in Sitra I.7, therefore
needs to be extended and expanded to the yogi-pratyaksha, the
direct experience of the subtler world. This is only a small part of
the teaching; but when one experiences this directly with one’s own
instrumentation, it reinforces the faith that what one has inferen-
tially arrived at and what the texts and the teachers have pro-
pounded is indeed true. It strengthens one’s resolve to proceed to
the greater inner reality which one has not yet experienced.

As stated under Sitras 1.15, 16 and 17 and further insisted upon
in Sitra 1.40, at each step of the subtle and yet subtler realizations
one finds them to be short of the ultimate spirituality, full of the
faults of impermanence and of a painful nature. So one develops
dispassion (vairagya) towards them until the fourth order of vai-
ragya, called the final mastery (vashikdra), is reached. As this wis-
dom (prajfia) develops in the mind that has been made to work at
its most intense capacity (sdmarthya), it removes obstacles from
the way of the other four upayas known as Shraddha, virya, smrti
and samadhi, which were defined in detail in Sitra 1.20.

This siitra has described the second method for effecting stability
of that mind which has already been brought to prasddana, the
pure and pleasant state explained in Sitra 1.33.
SOTRA 1.36 355
Sitra 1.36 0 Pareivar ar watfarordt
vishoka va jyotishmati

vishoka: free of grief or suffering

va: or

Jyotishmati: luminous, full of light (of sattva), lucid
Or, the natural mental state that becomes manifest as free of
grief is called lucid and effects the stability of the mind.

Vyasa’s Commentary

This natural mental state (pravrtti) having arisen, “effects the
mind’s stability”—this thought is brought forward from the preced-
ing siitra. As one practises concentration (dhdrand) in the heart
lotus, the apprehension of buddhi there is such that the sattva of
buddhi is luminous and clear like the sky. By mastering the steadi-
ness there, the manifestations alternate as the appearances of the
light of the sun, the moon, planets or gems.

Similarly, the mind-field that has reached accomplishment (sa-
mapatti) in asmita becomes pacific and infinite like a great ocean
without any waves and is identified only as “I am.” Concerning
that, it is said, “Having found that self who is minute like an atom,
one realizes himself only as ‘I am.’ ”

This vishokd (without grief) is twofold: one relating to objects
(vishayavati), and the other only as I-am-ness (asmitd-mdtra). This
manifest, natural state (pravrtti) is called the luminous one (jyotish-
mati), by which the yogi’s mind reaches the state of stability.

Discussion

In the heart center there is an eight-petaled lotus turned down-
wards. Concentration on exhalation, when the praéna is made to
flow through the kundalini slowly, makes the lotus turn upwards.
Then the state called vishoka jyotishmati ‘the one without grief,
and luminous’ manifests itself (VM, VB, BM, RY, SS, NTC, NTB).
The advent of such a pravrtti (as this word was defined in the

a
356 SUTRA 1.36

previous siitra) effects the stability of the mind. The thought “ef-
fects the stability of the mind” (sthiti-nibandhani) is brought for-
ward by way of an anuvrtti from the last sutra.

The sushumna stream connects the heart center to the internal
solar region and so forth, as well as to all the external lights such
as the sun. Concentration (dh@rand) (as defined in YS III.1) prac-
tised in the heart center connects this center to the regions of inner
lights (VB, VB, BM) whereby the yogi experiences his own faculty
of intelligence and wisdom (buddhi) and grasps its sattva. It is the
light of the sattva of buddhi that manifests itself within (BR, AD).
This light of the sattva of buddhi shows itself in many alternative
luminous forms, rays and radiances such as the sun, the moon,
planets, gems and so forth. These luminosities shine brilliantly
within the expansive space (@€kasha) of buddhi. That 1s, the buddhi
is experienced like a clear, illuminated sky or space (VM, VB). It is
not broken apart or cluttered by any other object nor surrounded
by a delimiting horizon (HA); and it is within this clear expanse
that the various radiant manifestations are experienced. This ex-
pansiveness of buddhi is experienced because here the individual
buddhi has broken its barriers and the universal buddhi is realized
as all-pervading (vibhu) (VB). Then all directions are unified and
the buddhi cannot be divided into numerous parts (HA).

Even though the buddhi itself 1s being experienced as a single
expanse of sattva, it still contains alternative radiances, luminosities,
that appear and disappear. Hence this pravrtti is called vishayavati,
“having objects of experience.” This vishayavati is not to be con-
fused with the lower vishayavati of the last stitra, which operates
within the realm of subtle senses, subtle elements and their corre-
sponding or derivative objects. The vishayavati of this satra has
only the internal objects (vishayas), which are constituted of the
light of sattva.

The next stage of this pravrtti 1s called asmitd-mdatrd ‘only the
awareness, “I am” ’. Here the yogi experiences the inward face of
buddhi and its universal counterpart, mahat, in which the reflection
of purusha 1s seen (as explained in Sitras 1.8, 1.17 and I1.6). Here
not even the diversity and manifoldness of the lights continue.
SUTRA 136 357

Because purusha is like an infinite, undisturbed ocean, the inward
face of buddhi as asmitd receiving its reflection appears like an
infinite ocean, calm and without waves. The experience of this
reflection of purusha is both expansive like the ocean and minute
like an atomic particle. (The expansive aspect will be discussed
further in Stitra II.19.) Here Vyasa quotes from Acharya Paficha-
Shikha:

“Having found that self who is minute like an atom, one realizes

himself only as ‘I am.’ ”

There is no contradiction between the description of the self or
of its reflection as both minute and expansive. It is repeatedly
described as minute as, or in the Upanishads more minute than, an
atomic particle. (For example, Katha Upanishad J1.8, Maitri Upan-
ishad V1.20, V1.38, VII.7, Mundaka Upanishad 11.2.2, 11.1.9, and
BhG VIII.9.) But it is also described as great, expansive (mahd@n),
as in the Brhada@ranyaka Upanishad 1V.4.20,22, Katha Upanishad
II.22 and so forth. Both ends of the great, subtle force are brought
together by stating that it is

More minute than the atom, greater than the great.
Katha Upanishad 11.20
The one more minute than whom there is none, nor is there one
greater.
Shvetashvatara Upanishad 111.9

It is noteworthy that the descriptions of the experience of 4tman
or purusha and of its reflection in asmit@—the mahat 4tman or
mahdan atma—are very similar. It is as though one person were to
describe the sky and another speak of its reflection in a pond. This
sitra, however, 1s concerned with the experience of asmitd alone.

Briefly again, the pravrtti called vishoka jyotishmati ‘the one
without grief, and luminous’ is experienced at two levels. First the
yogi experiences it as vishayavati, where the lights and radiances
like the sun, etc. are seen shining and alternating as though in a
clear sky. Thereafter comes asmita-mdtrd, wherein the reflection of
358 SOTRA 1.36

purusha is subtler than the subtle and more vast than an ocean and
yet without any waves, not even the alternation of lights appearing
or disappearing but only a pacific, infinite span. The reason for its
name, jyotishmati ‘the luminous or lucid one’, is obvious. It is
called vishokd because the mutation of rajas called shoka (sorrow,
grief, pain and suffering) ceases here (BR) as the process called
restiveness (chafichalya), by which rajas produces pain, stops (BG,
NB). This causes sattva to become dominant, and the consequent,
repeated pleasure in the mind-field (AD) and the illumination of
wisdom that accompanies it (BR) cause the mind to become estab-
lished in the habit of stability.
SOTRA 1.37 359
Sitral37 «= frarerateed ar ferara
vita-raga-vigshayam va chittam
vita-: devoid of those from whose mind
raga-: attraction, attachment the attraction towards
vishayam: sense objects sense objects is gone
v@: or
chittam: mind-field
Or, the mind-field having as its objects (of concentration) those
(sages) who are free of attachments (becomes stabilised).
Vyasa’s Commentary
The yogi’s mind-field, coloured by and reflecting as support
(@lambana) the mind-fields of those from whom all attraction for
and attachment to sense objects is gone, attains the state of stability.
Discussion
There is an apparent bringing together of two conflicting ideas
in Vyasa’s phrase
vita-raga-chitta-alambana-uparaktam.
Someone totally dispassionate and free of attractions and attach-
ments is vita-raga. The word raga is derived from the verb root
rafj, meaning “to colour,” as explained in Sitra 1.7. Upa-raktam,
also from rafj, means “coloured by proximity.” While on one
hand one aspires to free oneself from all worldly raga, it is advised
here to let one’s mind be drawn to those minds which have perfected
vairdgya and to let the light of those minds reflect into one’s own.
One exposes one’s mind to this process of becoming upa-rakta by
the minds of the vita-rdga saints because they will not permit an
aspirant to become attached to them. Their love reflects into one’s
mind without forming a worldly kind of dependence and attach-
ment.
Only one commentator (AD) has misunderstood this sttra to
360 SUTRA 1.37

mean that a mind from which the attraction to sense objects has
gone becomes calm. This is indeed not the intent of the siitra. Vita-
rdgas are those sages whose mind-fields have perfected vairdgya.
They are part of that guru lineage which begins with Hiranya-
garbha. They are considered disembodied masters helping the aspi-
rants. An aspirant practises the teachings of this siitra in the follow-
ing steps: (1) First he turns his mind to the lives, personalities and
beings of these sages. (2) Then he concentrates on surrendering his
mind to link up with theirs so that their vita-raga chittas, dispas-
sionate mind-fields, become his dlambanas, supportive factors (see
Sitra 1.17) or objects of concentration.

This is as far as the aspirant can go on his own. The guru then
initiates the aspirant to link the aspirant’s mind to his own and
through himself to the mind-fields of the sages of the lineage. Then
the minds of the sages descend into that of the aspirant, purify and
still his mind, and he goes into involuntary meditation. All their
knowledge descends into him and he slowly ascends to their higher
consciousness. It is these sages of the lineage, such as Sanaka,
Krshna Dvaipayana Vy4sa and so forth—and all the past Buddhas
in the Buddhist tradition—to whom homage is paid by the disciple.

The deeper meaning of this stra cannot be understood by those
not initiated into this tradition of linkage with the lineage.
SUTRA 138 361
Sitral.38  acatvarararad ari
svapna-nidra-jfiandlambanam va
svapna-: dream
nidra-: sleep
jfiana-: knowledge, awareness, observation
alambanam: supportive factor, object of meditation
va: and, or, also
Also, the mind-field whose object in meditation is the observation,
awareness and knowledge of the dream or sleep state becomes
stabilised.
Vyasa’s Commentary
The yogi’s mind-field attains the state of stability when
sits object in meditation is the observation, awareness and knowl-
edge of the dream state, or
eits object in meditation is the observation, awareness and knowl-
edge of the sleep state,
and it is identified with the same.
Discussion
The words in the stra are not simply svapna-nidra-alambanam,
“resorting to dream or sleep state”; rather, the word jfidna, “knowl-
edge,” is added. It is clear, therefore, that the mere experience of
ordinary dream or sleep is not meant here. But the intent of the
word jfana needs to be understood. In the opinion of some (RY,
BM, NTB, NTC), the word “knowledge” here means the objects of
knowledge (feya). Since there can be no knowledge without an
object of knowledge, both the knowledge and the object thereof
are to be included (VM). Therefore the dream experience implies
some of the dream objects which may be used as supportive factors
or objects of meditation (alambanas). Such an object should be
attractive to the mind and approved by texts and traditions (SS).
362 SUTRA 1.38
In particular, if one sees the deity in a dream and then wakes up,
he should immediately fix his mind on that image and meditate on
it (RY, BM, NT). Vachaspati puts it in accordance with the bhakti
tradition of the Puranas:
When one wakes—
having in dream worshipped the image of the great Lord,
so attractive that it drew the mind,
adorned with garlands of the most fragrant jasmines,
made of the most virtuous moonstone,
as though sculpted from the moon itself,
with all the limbs so gentle and tender
as though imitating a lotus stalk,
dwelling in the solitude of a pleasant grove—
when one wakes up from such a dream with a pleasant mind,
then contemplating the same image, his mind-field
becomes totally absorbed in it,
becomes one with it and attains the state of stability.
It is known that such dreams occur
e(in rare cases) when a devotee’s mind projects an image it has
longed for and makes it real in the dream, or
«(in even rarer cases) when the deity presents itself to the devotee
« to draw him to worship, or
« to respond to his prayers
Such dreams may, of course, also be symptoms of a disturbed
mind, but that is not a consideration here. The Yoga-sitras deal
only with minds which have embarked on the path to stillness
and not those in the kshipta or madha categories (YS 1.1). Hence
Vachaspati clarifies:
When one wakes up . . . with a pleasant mind (prasanna-mandah).
The word prasanna has a special sense in yoga,*2 which does not
apply in psychopathological cases. Such dreams of one with a
32 See prasdda-guna (Sitra 12, p 102), prasdda (Sitra | 16, pp 212 and 215) and prasddana
(Sitra 133, p 340)
SUTRA 1.38 363
pleasant mind are considered in all spiritual traditions to be either
(a) the mind’s genuine response to its own longing for God or (db) a
vision conferred by God in response to the devotee’s longing. It is,
however, the consensus of all commentators that indiscriminate
experience of all kinds of dreams is not meant here but only those
whose images are conducive to the mind’s stability.

As to concentration on sleep, it is suggested that one should fix
the mind on the pleasure that occurs in sleep (RY, NTB, SS) and
that, remembering, one should contemplate that pleasure (NTC).
The sleep, however, must be that sattvic one waking from which
one makes the observation, “I slept pleasantly,” (VM, BM) as
explained in Sitra J.10. It is also a matter of experience that such
a sleep is a good preparation for meditation by rendering the mind
light and alert. The sattva of such a sleep lingers on in the mind
when one wakes up and meditation after such a sleep is very
refined and pure. One should let the mind become filled with the
sattvic impression created by such dream or sleep (NTC); preferably
one should contemplate it and get into meditation immediately
after the experience of such dream or sleep.

The commentators (VB, BG, NB) who are more biased towards
a Vedantic interpretation of the Yoga-sitras follow the themes pro-
vided in the Mandukya-karikas and the Yoga-vasishtha. According
to this philosophy one views the ordinary wakeful world as the
cosmic dream. The entire worldly existence is a sleep in which the
pure self has forgotten itself. As one develops dispassion (vairdgya)
towards it, the mind attains stability.

All of the above interpretations are accurate but incomplete
without the special practices prescribed to the initiate in the experi-
ential tradition. Here one learns to observe one’s own dream and
Sleep states. First one learns to observe the dreams, then he learns
to monitor, modulate and direct them. Finally as the unconscious
mind, whose samskaras produce dreams, is purified, and a full
understanding and mastery of the sleep state 1s established, the
habit of dreaming is altogether eliminated. It is thus that the obser-
vation, awareness and knowledge of the dream state stabilises the
mind.
364 SOTRA 1.38

Training for mastery of the sleep state also follows several steps.
Philosophically, one views the experience of personal sleep as part
of the cosmic sleep of tamas, which has befallen consciousness.
Knowing, however, that the pure self is ever-awake (nitya-buddha)
and that only a small part of the mind actually sleeps (Siitra 1.10),
one learns to observe the sleep process by dwelling in the light of
the pure self and by resorting to the higher mind, which observes
the lower, sleeping mind. Thus one learns to enter yoga-nidrd,
conscious sleep. When the mind becomes absorbed in this experi-
ence of consciousness, the true knowledge of sleep thus becomes
the object of meditation. The mind then becomes established in
stability. —
SOTRAI.39 365
Sitra 1.39 awattwacerarg ar
yathabhimata-dhyanad va

yatha-: as

abhimata-: agreeable, desired, favourite, object of choice

dhyanat: by meditation

va: or, and, also
Also through meditation in whatever way or on whatever object
agreeable the mind-field attains stability.

Vyasa’s Commentary

Let one meditate on whatever is agreeable. (The mind-field)

attaining stability there becomes stabilised on whatever else, too.
Discussion

Different individuals have varying inclinations; likewise the yogi
also feels reverent faith (Shraddha) towards different entities. By
meditating on these he may attain desired perfection (BR). These
objects of one’s meditation can be many—such as various deities
and divine incarnations (VB, VM, BG, NB, BM, RY, SS, NT), or
external objects (AD) such as the moon (BR), or internal ones
such as the network of channels (nddis) (BR) of nerves and the
kundalini flow. These objects should be those approved of in the
texts and traditions (SS) and not something licentious like nude
women, etc., (RS) such as some people imagine.

While all the other commentators are very brief on this sitra,
NTC fills many pages and provides an exhaustive list of the possible
internal objects or points of meditation. Gradually the external
objects must be replaced by the corresponding internal ones. For
example, if one 1s inclined to make pilgrimages to sacred places, let
him give way to that inclination; but then the practice should help
him to discover that all sacred places of pilgrimage are within
oneself. NTC has given a complete map of consciousness (such as
the chakras, nerve channels and energy channels, which he identi-
fies with various sacred rivers and holy cities and temples). Yantras,
366 SUTRA 1.39

visual concentrations for each chakra, are given, following the
norms of the tantric tradition. He also lists the points on which
concentrations called myasa are performed; these concentrations
require one-letter mantras contemplated into particular points of
the body. The loci of various deities within the personality are
indicated.

The correspondence of the tattvas (the five gross elements) with
the states of breath is explained by NTC in accordance with the
svara science. The'secrets of the hamsa-mantra (soham) are abridged
from the Hamsa Upanishad. Various ways of contemplation and
concentration on all these objects of meditation are also suggested.
All these are not being elaborated here, because each individual
needs to learn the method appropriate to his personality from a
qualified guide only. The selection is made on two grounds:

1. On the basis of a person’s natural inclinations, which are of
two kinds:

a. The ordinary objects of attraction and experience in life. If
one is unable to practise restraint and turn the mind away
from a particular object, let him enter into total one-pointed
concentration on it. For example if one loves delicious foods,
let him so concentrate on the experience of the taste buds that
a minute amount of food produces great ecstasy. Gradually
one will thereby establish mastery over the object of attrac-
tion and will no longer be enslaved by it.

The habit of concentration thus formed can be applied to
other meditations.

b. The objects of one’s faith (deities, incarnations and so forth).
One may concentrate on these and the success in such con-
centration, again, can be applied to other meditations.

2. On the basis of the fact that a meditator’s mind is often drawn
towards certain points (such as the heart center) or certain sen-
sations and experiences (such as of light). When the experience
becomes persistent and consistent, one should respond to it and
let the mind become absorbed in it.
SOTRA 139 367
Siitras 1.35~39 list the various ways of stabilising the mind on
objects of meditation. In addition, SOtras 1.33-39 give the chitra-
parikarmas, the ways of adorning, refining, purifying, preparing,
the mind through diligent practice (abhydsa). By so doing, the
mind may reach the perfection of stability and of vairdgya (to be
defined in the next stra) so as to be readied for the attainments of
samadhi (to be explained in Sdtra 1.41).
368 SOTRA 1.40
Satral.40 «—- Tea TAME Caarser Taetawre: |
paramanu-parama-mahattvanto’sya vashikarah
parama-anu-: (from) minutest atom
parama-: (up to) ultimate
mahattva-: greatness, magnitude
antah: ending in, extending up to
asya: of this one
vashikarah: power, mastery, control
This yogi’s mastery and control is established over (the subtlest,
starting from) the minutest atom and extending up to the ulti-
mate magnitude.
Vyasa’s Commentary
As he enters into the subtle, his mind-field attains the state of
Stability at every level, all the way up to the minutest atom. As he
enters into the large, the mind-field’s level of stability reaches the
ultimate greatness. Thus, his remaining unhindered as he pursues
both ends is what is called the highest mastery (vashikara). The
yogi’s mind-field, brought to all-round perfection through such
mastery, no longer requires the preparation (parikarma) that is
produced through practice (abhydsa).
Discussion
The preparations and purifications of the mind-field (chitta-pari-
karmas) through various practices (abhydsas) have been described
in the previous siitras. This sitra states their final result, the total
mastery and control (vashikara), which we shall explain below.
There are two kinds of concentrations in yoga’ those on the
subtle and those on the expansive. Concentrations on subtle objects
lead to the experience of the minutest entity. For example, if one
concentrates on a flame or a white circle, gradually the area of
concentration should be narrowed until only the minutest spark
remains in the mind. Conversely, to expand the mind one may
send the thought as though the mind is spreading out to touch all
SOTRA 140 369
the possible dimensions, up to infinite space. On all these paths the
mind encounters many obstacles, and consequently it wavers. Grad-
ually the parikarmas help it to settle down, until all obstacles are
overcome. The mind-field grasps the ultimate in the subtle and the
minute as well as in the most expansive, not one or the other at a
time (ekatara koti) but ubhayam kotim (both simultaneously), or
at any level of the yogi’s choice in either direction. When the mind
becomes thus settled, it no longer encounters even physical obstruc-
tions such as hunger and thirst (NTC) as interruptions of samadhi.
Wherever the yogi chooses, his mind remains settled indefinitely.
This vashikara is not to be confused with the highest of the four
states of apara vairdgya, explained in Siitra I.15. This is no mere
dispassion but, in Vy4sa’s words, para vashikara, “supreme mas-
tery.” As this mastery is established over the mind, the objects of
concentration also come under the yogi’s total control.

There are disagreements among commentators as to the intent
of the word mahattva, which in ordinary Sanskrit simply means
“greatness.” Contrasted with the subtlest and the minutest, it be-
comes “the largest” or “the most expansive.” In the view of some
commentators, this “most expansive” is twofold: the internal and
the external. The internal is the endless universal asmitd, and the
external is the cosmos (HA).

In the view of others (BR, RY, AD), the expansive objects are
those such as space (akdsha). Whether one is speaking of the cosmic
physical space or the internal space of consciousness (chid-akasha)
is not specified. To BM the word mahattva has suggested mahat-
tattva or mahat. Mahat, the first evolute of prakrti, is indeed the
most expansive of the material modes and is the substratum of
asmita in the samadhi experience. In the opinion of VB, NB, BG,
and NTC the phrase parama-mahattva in this siitra refers to the
great beings of high accomplishment, purushas, the great spirits in
the universe whom NTC calls the virdj-purushas, or “shining space-
persons”—in other words the beings of deific attainments. All these
meanings seem acceptable, each being the ultimate in its own di-
mension. The expansive objects may be divided into the following
categories:
370 SOTRA 1.40

«Among the five physical elements, tattvas, the greatest is space
(akasha).

«Among the evolutes of matter, mahat is the first and the most
expansive.

«Among the objects of samprajfiata samadhi, asmita, whose sub-
stratum is mahat, is the highest.

«In the entire inward journey one continues to gain greater access
into the inner space of consciousness (chid-dkasha) and finally
rests in it.

eThose who are the greatest among the accomplished ones are the
deific beings with whom one establishes contact, which finally
becomes unhindered and permanent.

All of these are within the yogi’s reach as his mind stabilises and
reaches total mastery.
SOTRA 1.41 371
Sitral41 «- eftorqeefewraera wonidtqrerarerg
ACTALH TTA AAA: |
kshina-vrtter abhijatasyeva maner
grahity-grahana-grahyeshu tat-stha-tad-afijanata
samapattih
kshina-vrtteh: of one whose vrttis have subsided
abhijatasya: of pure-born
iva: like
maneh: of gem, crystal
grahitr-: in, towards, the apprehender
grahana-: process of apprehension, instrument of apprehension
grahyeshu: apprehended objects
tat-stha-: becoming stable on them
tad-afijanata: coalescence with them
samapattih: encounter, transmutation, coalescence, attainment of
a state of consciousness, proficiency
When one’s modifications (vrttis) have subsided, his (mind’s)
stability on and coalescence with the apprehender (grahitr), the
process and instrumentation of apprehension (grahana) and the
objects of apprehension (grahya), like pure crystal (which takes
on the reflection and colour of proximate objects), is called
samapatti.
Vyasa’s Commentary
Now that one’s mind-field has attained stability, what is the
nature and the field of his proficiency, attainment and transmuta-
tion? It is explained:
[Sitra-] When one’s modifications (vrttis) have subsided, his
(mind's) stability on and coalescence with the apprehender (gra-
hitr), the process and instrumentation of apprehension (grahana)
and the objects of apprehension (grdAya), like pure crystal (which
takes on the reflection and colour of proximate objects), is called
samapatti.
372, SOTRA 1.41

“When one’s modifications (vrttis) have subsided” means “when
one whose causal cognition (pratyaya) has set.” “Like pure crystal”
proffers an analogy. As a crystal depending on a particular proxi-
mate object (upa@shraya) becomes affected by its colour and appears
to take on the form of that proximate object, so also the mind-
field coloured by that object of apprehension (grdhya), which is its
supportive factor (a4lambana) in meditation, and transmuted into
that very object, appears to take on the form of that grahya.
Similarly, when coloured by the subtle aspect of elements, it ap-
pears as the subtle element. Again, coloured by the gross @lambana,
transmuted into that gross @lambana, it appears as the gross a@lam-
bana. Yet again, coloured by the diversities of the universe, and
transmuted into those diversities, it appears in their form.

The same should be applied in the case of the senses, which are
the instruments of apprehension (grahanas). The mind-field, col-
oured by the grahanas, which are its Glambana, appears in their
form. Similarly, when coloured by that purusha who is the agent
of apprehension (grahitr) and its Glambana, the mind becomes
transmuted into such a grahitr (purusha) and appears to take on
the nature of the same. Again, when it is coloured by the liberated
purusha who is its @lambana, transmuted into that liberated puru-
sha, it appears in the nature of that liberated purusha.

The mind is like a pure-born crystal. The purusha, the senses
and the elements are respectively the agent, the instruments and
the objects of apprehension (grahitr, grahana and grdhya). The
mind-field’s “stability on and coalescence with” them means that it
remains concentrated on them and takes on their form. This is
called proficiency, transmutation, coalescence and attainment of
the given state of consciousness (samapatti)

Discussion

The methods for stabilising the mind have been presented (VM,
BM, RY, SS), starting with abhyasa and vairdgya (Sitra 1.12) and
continuing through the chitta-parikarmas (Sutras 1.33-39). Vashi-
kara, the indication of a stabilised mind (VM, BM, RY), also has
been explained. The two levels of yoga, samprajfidta and asam-
prajfidta samadhis, have been discussed in general (VB); now their
SOTRA 141 373
principal end-result will occupy the rest of Chapter | (BG). First to
be explained are the field (vishaya) and nature of samprajfiata
(VM) samadhi, the samadhi with seed (sa-bija) (VB, SS). When the
mind-field has reached the one-pointed ground (ekagra bhiimi),
what is its nature and its field (HA)? Vyasa says:

“When one’s modifications (vrttis) have subsided” means “when
one whose causal cognition (pratyaya) has set.”

The term “set” was explained in Sitra 1.18 as, “(All the vrttis) have
set like the sun into the very source from which they have arisen.”
But that description referred to asamprajfiata samadhi, hence all
the vrttis. It was explained in Siitra 1.2 that that siitra does not
read “Yoga is the control of all vrttis” because all vrttis are con-
trolled only in asamprajfidta, whereas samprajfiata is meant to be
included in yoga. Since the current siitra (1.41) deals with sampra-
jfiata, Vyasa here omits the word “all.” In other words, the clauses
“modifications have subsided” and “causal cognition (pratyaya)
has set” mean that vrttis other than those of the object of concen-
tration (dhyeya) have been brought under control (VB, BG, NB),
because the samdpatti defined in this siitra is also a vrtti (NBB).
The subsiding of vrttis in this context is limited to the rajasic and
tamasic ones such as valid proofs (pramanas) (VM, RY, BD). For
an explanation of pratyaya the reader is referred to Sutra 1.10.

Even though the mind-field has the full capacity to realize all
matters, it fails to do so because of the intervention of other objects
of thought (vishayas); only when such interruption is totally pre-
vented through concentration does the full realization (sakshat-
kGra) of the objects of concentration (dhyeya) occur naturally (VB,
NB, NBB). This is the true direct perception (pratyaksha). Such a
state of the mind-field occurs only in samprajfata and not in the
lower concentrations, where the totality of the object of concentra-
tion (@/lambana) cannot be fully grasped (VB). Samapatti, the pro-
ficiency, attainment and transmutation of the mind, is the wisdom
(prajfia) thus gained as derived from samprajfiata (VB) and is tech-
nically defined in Sitra 1.17.

This is elaborated by way of an example. Vyasa says:
374. SOTRA 141

“Like pure crystal” proffers an analogy. As a crystal depending

on a particular proximate object (upd@Shraya) becomes affected

by its colour and appears to take on the form of that proximate

object, so also the mind-field. . . .
An upashraya, a proximate object, is an external condition (upadhi).
For example, when a red flower is placed near a crystal, the crystal
is affected, overshadowed by it (VM). This is possible only because
the crystal is pure by nature. It receives the reflection of a nearby
object only when external blemishes, such as dust, are cleansed off
(VB, BG, NB, BD). The way it is affected by the colour of the
proximate objects is a subduing of its true nature (RY, SS).

When abhydasa and vairagya have cleansed off the external im-
purities of the mind-field, the objects of concentration (Glambanas)
can clearly and fully reflect in it (BD, RY), and a coalescence
occurs like that of milk in a marble cup (RS).

The objects of concentration (dhyeyas or Glambanas), which
were clearly defined in Siitra 1.17, are classified differently here.
Their order in Patajfijali’s siitra is

1. grahitr: the agent of apprehension, the one who grasps or ex-
periences or cognizes

2. grahana: the process and the instruments of apprehension,
with which one grasps, experiences or cognizes

3. grahya: the objects of apprehension, the ones that are grasped,
experienced or cognized

The order in Vya4sa’s commentary 1s the opposite: object, instru-
ment and agent (grahya, grahana, grahitr). This discrepancy has
been taken note of by VM, VB, BR and RY. VM states that the
order in the siitra is contrary to the sequence of attainments and
should simply be ignored. VB and BR favour and justify Vyasa’s
order on the ground that it follows the sequence of one’s develop-
ment in samadhi (VB), that is, the plateaus (bhamis) that the yogi
gains (BR). No commentator has explained the reason for Patafi-
jali’s order. An explanation is attempted here.

In Sitra I.17 the progression was shown from the outward to
the inward, from the gross to the subtle, from the objects perceived
SOTRA 141 375
to the inner perceiver. This order is followed also in YS 1.42-44.
Patafijali’s intent in the current siitra might be to draw attention to
the true sequence in any cognition, apprehension or perception. It
is the perceiver whose will initiates the experience, who utilises the
instruments of cognition which thereupon grasp the external ob-
jects. The siitra does not state explicitly what it suggests implicitly:
One whose mind is trained through abhydsa, purified through vai-
ragya and brought to stability through chitta-parikarmas now be-
gins to view not the objects as the principal constituent of a cogni-
tion but rather the cognizer as the principal constituent; hence the
order is reversed, and the innermost one now predominates. Patafi-
jali’s order emphasizes that the grahitr-samapatti is the principal
attainment (NTC). Vyasa only appears to be mute concerning the
reason for his apparent contradiction of Patafijali. In fact, upon
looking at his commentary closely, it becomes clear that even though
he explains grahyas, etc. in an order opposite to that of Pataifijali
(perhaps to help the non-proficient), in the last paragraph of his
commentary he reverts to Pataiijali’s order:
The purusha, the senses and the elements are respectively the
agent, the instruments and the objects of apprehension (grahitr,
grahana and grahya).
It is also noteworthy that in subdividing gra@hyas he reverses himself
and takes the subtler to the grosser progression! To quote Vyasa:
The mind-field coloured by that object of apprehension (gra@hya),
which Is its supportive factor (@lambana) in meditation, and trans-
muted into that very object, appears to take on the form of that
grahya. Similarly, when coloured by the subtle aspect of elements,
it appears as the subtle element Again, coloured by the gross
Glambana, transmuted into that gross G/ambana, it appears as the
gross Glambana. Yet again, coloured by the diversities of the
universe, transmuted into those diversities, 1t appears in their
form.
The agent, instrument and object are subdivided and explained
here as follows:
376 SUTRA I41
I. Grahya
Grahyas are divided into three categories:
1. The subtleties of the elements (bhita-siikkshma)
2. The gross objects of concentration (sthiila-dlambanas)
3. The diversities of the universe (vishva-bhedas)
This threefold division is explained in two ways:
A. (VB, HA, NBB)

« The subtleties of the elements include all existence from the

subtle elements (tan-mdatras) up to and including prakrti.

e The gross objects of concentration are the five gross elements.

« The diversities of the universe (included in the gross objects by

HA), are the conscious and unconscious entities and objects
(such as (VM) cows and jars, respectively).
B. BG and NB hold that the grahyas are divided into:
gross: the five elements and presumably their modifications,
namely the diverse external objects
subtle: the five subtle elements (1an-matras)
subtlest: prakrti
VM’s opinion appears more consistent with YS 1.17 and YS 1.42-
45, wherein grahyas are the objects of concentration only in sa-
vitarka and sa-vichara samadhis, as shown in the chart on p. 247.
II. Grahana
Concerning the grahanas, Vyasa says:

The same should be applied in the case of the senses, which
are the instruments of apprehension (grahanas) The mind-field,
coloured by the grahanas, which are its G@lambana, appears in
their form.

Grahanas are similarly subdivided into three (VB, NBB):
!. The diversities in the universe, that 1s, the physical senses of
various beings
2. The gross senses (the perceiver’s own)
3. The subtle senses, namely, ahamkara and buddhi
SOTRA 141 377
In HA’s opinion, the physical senses having been included in the
gross elements, only the inner powers of senses (indriya-shaktis)
are to be understood as grahanas.
Ill. Grahitr

Vyasa’s commentary on grahirr is:

Similarly, when coloured by that purusha who is the agent of
apprehension (grahitr) and its Glambana, the mind becomes trans-
muted into such a grahitr (purusha) and appears to take on the
nature of the same. Again, when it is coloured by the liberated
purusha who is its Glambana, transmuted into that liberated
purusha, it appears 1n the nature of that liberated purusha.

Grahitr, the agent, cannot be subdivided between gross and sub-
tle, and no such attempt is made by the commentators. Vyasa,
however, differentiates between (a) grahitr purushas, spiritual selves
that appear to be agents, and (b) mukta purushas, the liberated
ones. Vyasa not only says “grahitr,” the agent, but adds “purusha”
so as to preclude buddhi alone (VB) but to include the purusha
reflected in asmita (VM, BR, RY) or in chitta (NBB), totally iden-
tified with it as mahan Gtma (HA) (to be defined in Stitra I1.19).

The question arises: Are there indeed two kinds of purushas?
Certainly not. There is no difference between purushas dwelling in
a bound (baddha) personality and purushas which are liberated.
Purusha 1s ever-free by nature (nitya-mukta-svabhava). The subject
of the stitra, however, is not the nature of purusha but the stages in
the samadhi of wisdom (samprajfata). The final stages may be
divided into three levels:

1. The realization and mastery of buddhi and the mahat principle.
There 1s not yet a realization of purusha.

2 Realizing the reflection of purusha in asmita as the principal
constituent, the agent, grahitr.

3 Realizing that the reflection is not the purusha. Purusha is
ever-free (mukta), purusha 1s the conscious principle whose
reflection 1s seen in asmuta

Vyasa, therefore, differentiates between the proficiencies of samadhi
(samapattis) between 2 and 3 above.
378 SOTRAI41

Another explanation of “mukta purusha” is that the term refers
to the great liberated, historical figures like Shukadeva (who was
Vydsa’s son) (VM,VB). If such were the case, this type of meditation
should be placed under the category of sa-vitarka samadhi, in
which such external personages can be an object of concentration.
But Vyasa places mukta purushas after and beyond the purusha
reflected in asmnitd. In fact, Vydsa’s statement and VM’s and VB’s
subtle suggestion point to the greatest mystery in yoga. “Mukta
purusha” does not refer to the bodies or physical appearances of
historical personages, but to the purushas themselves, the liberated
spiritual selves. These disembodied masters do guide the aspirants
who become linked to them in samadhi. These liberated purushas,
spiritual selves, may reflect into the chitta or asmitda of the aspirant
in samadhi, thus imparting their purity to such a mind. This is the
mode of the guru’s guidance all the way to Hiranya-garbha and
beyond.

And beyond the greatest mukra purusha is God (ishvara), who,
thereafter, begins to reflect in such a mind (NBB).

Vyasa concludes his commentary thus:

The mind is like a pure-born crystal. The purusha, the senses and
the elements are respectively the agent, the instruments and the
objects of apprehension (grahitr, grahana and gradhya). The mind-
field’s “stability on and coalescence with” them means that it
remains concentrated on them and takes on their form This 1s
called proficiency, transmutation, coalescence and attainment of
the given state of consciousness (samapattt).

At each of the stages of attainment of concentration on the
various subdivisions of grahitr, grahana and grahya (namely: pu-
rushas, senses, and elements), samapatti is to be defined as the
mind-field (a) dwelling on the object, becoming stable thereupon
(tat-stha), and (b) achieving coalescence (tad-afijanata) therewith
(like milk in a marble cup), so that the mind takes the nature and
form of that object and is identified with it. The relationship of the
three—grahya-samapatti, grahana-samapatti, and grahitr-samapatti—
with the four levels of samprajfidta samadhi has been shown in the
SOTRA 1.41 379
chart on p. 247 and should be studied there.
Sitras 1.17, 19, 20, 41, and 42-50 constitute the explanation of
samprajfiata, and therefore the current siitra should be studied
within that context.
380 SUTRA 1.42
Sitral.42 ax eardarafrect: agatut afanat
AAI: |
tatra Shabdartha-jfiana-vikalpaih sankirna
. sa-vitarka samapattih
tatra: there, among them
Shabda-: (with) word
artha-: meaning, object denoted or signified
jfia@na-: knowledge
vikalpaih: with options (RP, BB), alternations, imaginary
cognitions
sankirnad: mixed, mingled, commingled, alloyed
sa-vitarka: vitarka-accompanied, accompanied with gross thought
sam4@pattih: encounter, transmutation, coalescence, attainment of
a state of consciousness, proficiency
Among them, the one commingled with alternations and imagi-
nary cognitions of word, the object signified as meaning and
knowledge is called the vitarka-accompanied samdapatti.
Vyasa’s Commentary
Thus, for exdmple: “cow”; this is a word. The cow is the object
denoted as the meaning (artha). “Cow” 1s the knowledge (j/dna).
Even though they (that is, the word, the object, and the knowledge)
are all distinct (vi-bhakta), \t 1s seen that they are apprehended as
not divided by distinction (a-vibhadga). When divided and separated
(vi-bhajyama@na), the characteristics of the word are different, the
characteristics of the obyect— which 1s the meaning- are some other,
and the characteristics of the knowledge yet other. Thus their paths
are divided and separated (vi-bhakta). When the yogi has reached
samd@panna, (an accomplishment) of coalescence (sam@patti) with
regard to them (fatra), (an awareness of) the object meant*4
(artha) by “cow” and such imposes itself upon his samadhi-wisdom
33 Vikalpa, as explained 1n Sitra 1 9, also includes linguistic misconception
34 This translation of the word artha 1s taken {rom HA(E).
SUTRA 1.42 381
(samadhi-prajria). If it (this awareness) revolves35 as intertwined
(anu-viddha) with the alternating (sequences) of the word, the ob-
ject meant and the knowledge (derived therefrom) and (the atten-
dant) imaginary cognition, such a commingled samdpatti is called
“the one accompanied with gross thought” (sa-vitarka).
Discussion

The last siitra provided a general definition of sama@patti. Now
specific samdpattis are being explained.

Of the four samadhis of wisdom (samprajfidta) which were ex-
plained in Sitra I.17, the first two are further subdivided into two
levels each. Sa-vitarka samadhi is thus divided into sa-vitarka
samapatti and nir-vitarka samapatti. This siitra explains sa-vitarka
samapatti. The field of both of these levels and the objects of
concentration therein are the same as explained in Sutra 1.17, but
the attainments are different.

Before a better understanding of these levels and of Vyasa’s
commentary can be gained, one needs to fathom the meaning of
the term vikalpa. Vikalpa was defined in Sitra 1.9 and translated
as (1) “imaginary cognition,” which also included linguistic miscon-
ception, all explained in that siitra. This is the technical application
of the word to yoga; however, more commonly the word also
means (2) an option or alternative, (3) an alternation of occurrences
between two or more factors (for example, there is a vikalpa of
positive and negative currents), and (4) (in psychology) an alterna-
tive negative thought in opposition to and alternating with a posi-
tive thought or resolution (sankalpa). For example, “If 1 look at it
this way it seems right, and I shall/should do it” is a sarikalpa; but,
“If I look at it from a different perspective it seems wrong, and I
shall/should not do it,” is a vikalpa.

All these contents of the term seem to be intended in the use of
the word vwikalpa in this sitra. More specifically:

I. The word, the object denoted, and the knowledge or idea (RP,

HA(E), BB) produced are distinct and separate, but a speaker or
35 That 1s, takes turns or appears in turns
382 SUTRA 1.42
listener commingles the three as though they were one. This is
an imaginary cognition or linguistic misconception, the vikalpa
defined in Sitra 1.9.

2. However, there remains an option open to a clearer thinker as
to which of these three (word, object or idea) he wishes to
cognize or concentrate on at any given moment.

3. Thereafter these three or any two may alternate between mo-
ments.

4. As a consequence the sequence of sarikalpa-vikalpa may continue
on however subtle a basis.

All these vikalpas are present when the yogi is concentrating on
any one word-object-idea complex in sa-vitarka samdapatti of the
sa-vitarka samadhi. The word tarka designates any thought accom-
panied by words. Vi-tarka is a variation denoting that only par-
ticular objects are to be considered. Concentration in sa-vitarka
samapatti is invariably accompanied by the names of the objects of
concentration; hence the discussion in this sitra centres upon the
words, the objects denoted thereby, and the knowledge which is
the relationship between the words and objects grasped by the
mind.

Because the primary objects of concentration in sa-vitarka are
the five gross elements and the eleven senses themselves, as gross a
combination of them as a cow would rarely be an adlambana. Vyasa
says:

Thus, for example: “cow”;3¢ this 1s a word The cow 1s the
object denoted as the meaning (artha). “Cow” is the knowledge
Gfidna) Even though they are tll distinct (vi-bhakta), it is seen
that they are apprehended as not divided by distinction (a-vibhaga).
When divided and separated (vi-bhayyamdana), the characteristics
of the word are different, the characteristics of the object—which
is the meaning—are some other, and the characteristics of the
knowledge yet other. Thus their paths are divided and separated
(vi-bhakta).

36 Vyasa might have used words like “yar” or “cloth” (RY), but the word “cow” was chosen

to illustrate this point, following the tradition of exposition used by grammarians of the

schools allied with yoga In discussing secular words, “cow” was almost always the first one
chosen, perhaps because cows were the mainstay of an ashram’s subsistence, and the disci-
ples were almust always tending to “the guru’s cows” when not attending to their studies
SOTRA 1.42 383

(VM) When there is a word (in this instance, “cow”, there arises
the misconception (vikalpa) that the object denoted (the cow itself)
and the mental ideation (of the cow) are not distinct from the
word. That is, when the cow is an object, there arises the vikalpa
that the word and the ideation are not apart from the object.
Similarly, when the mental idea of the cow appears, the vikalpa is
that the word “cow” and the external object perceived as cow
(which was denoted by the word) are both indistinct from the
mental idea (VM, RY, BD). But (VB) when the learned experts
apply the affirmative and negative methods of logic—-somewhat
similar to induction and deduction—and examine the three care-
fully, it is found that these components of the word-object-ideation
complex named “cow” are all distinct, each with its own charac-
teristics (VM, VB).

What, then, are the distinct characteristics of the word, the object
meant, and the mental ideation? What attributes or qualifications
divide, separate and distinguish them from each other? These can
only be illustrated as examples rather than listed completely.

A. The word is of two kinds (BR), one a unitary revelation
(sphota)3’ and the other the sound qualified, for example, by
high and low notes (VM, VB, NB, NBB). It is grasped with the
sense of hearing (BR, HA) and dwells in the sense of speech. It
is not the cow in the pasture that has high or low notes or is
uttered or heard as the sound, nor is it the understanding,
“cow.”

B. The object denoted has genus, species, etc. (BR, AD). Further-
more, it has qualities like form (miirti) or non-sentience (jadatva)
(VM, VB, NB, NBB) (although the attribute of non-sentience
Ils not applicable to a cow, the example in question).

C. The object is experienced with the senses of touch and sight,
and dwells in the cow-pen (HA). It is not the word “cow” that

37 To explain the concept of sphoya in this present work would add great volume The

reader 1s enouraged to see the author's book Mantra and Medutation (Honesdale, Pa

Himalayan International Institute of Yoga Science and Philosophy, 1981). There are also

numerous academic studies on this subject in the field of Indian linguistics which do not

relate the topic to the origin, practice and experience of the mantra.
384 SOTRA 1.42
is seen nor does that cow from the cow-pen migrate into the
mind as the idea so that it is no longer seen in the cow-pen or
pasture!

D. Knowledge or ideation (jf@na) is the predominantly sattvic
vrtti of buddhi (BR). It has the attributes of elucidation and
formlessness (VM, VB, NB, NBB). It dwells in the mind-field
(HA).

The word is formed of syllables or letters of the alphabet; the
object has hardness, etc.; the idea is devoid of dimension and
parts, and so forth (HA). In vikalpa the error of non-distinction
(abheda-bhrama) among these appears (VB, NB, NBB, BG, NTC),
causing them to be identified with each other (SS). But each takes
its own path, its own development in causation, and undergoes
independent mutation. Each has its own way of presenting its
nature (VM, VB, HA).

Let us read Vyasa further:

When the yogi has reached samapanna, (an accomplishment) of
coalescence (samdpatti) with regard to them (satra), (an awareness
of) the object meant (artha) by “cow” and such imposes itself
upon his samadhi-wisdom (samadhi-prajfia). \f it (this awareness)
revolves as intertwined (anu-viddha) with the alternating (se-
quences) of the word, the object meant and the knowledge (de-
rived therefrom) and (the attendant) imaginary cognition, such a
commingled samdpatti is called “the one accompanied with gross
thought” (sa-vitarka).

In sa-vitarka samapatti the word, the object and the ideation are
commingled, causing the samadhi to be alloyed, mixed, with the
notions and ideations whose constituents are unanalysed and con-
sequently are several. Having these many constituents as the alam-
bana, as though they were one, superimposed (adhydsa) on each
other (BR), prevents the true one-pointedness from developing in
its fulness Hence this samadhi is the lowest, the most impure. The
processes of this commingling occur in such patterns as the fol-
lowing.

The yogi experiencing the presence of a single word-object-
SUTRA 142 385
ideation complex such as “cow” does not distinguish among these
three constituents. Therefore it is uncertain which one of these
three constituents is being realized or mastered. The mastery is,
therefore, incomplete.

Also the coalescence of the object of concentration (G@lambana)
with the mind-field is incomplete. There remains a separation be-
tween the observing mind and the @lambana of concentration so
that (VB) there may appear such observations as

e“This is a cow I am concentrating on.”

“This is a vision of God (Narayana)” (VB).

«“This 1s space, this is light or fire (tejas) that | am experiencing; it

all consists of material elements and should be avoided with the

help of vairdgya” (HA).
Of these the first is a translation of the expression gaur-ayam
bhasate (VB, NBB), literally, “Here this cow shines forth, appears,
is being experienced.” In this experience the occurrence of the
thought “cow” comprises the superimposition (vikalpa) of the word
and the object. In the occurrence of the thoughts “appears, is being
experienced,” it is the object and the ideation that are commingled
(NBB).

Since these superimpositions of word, object and idea upon
each other (causing the appearance of an imagined unity in a
manifold reality) only present what, in effect, is unreal, all such
superimpositions come under the category of vikalpa. Such a super-
imposition does not aid the yogi to realize fully or master the
reality of any of its constituents (RY), just as water and milk
mixed together cannot be classified separately either as one or the
other (RS).

Furthermore, where there are many constituents to an idea,
there are many ideas. They cannot occur simultaneously. There-
fore, just as in ordinary consciousness, where thoughts come and
go one after another—and are called sa-vikalpa (NB)—so also on
the subtle level of sa-vitarka samadhi this vikalpa occurs. Also, as
explained earlier, the mind is divided into three thoughts or vrttis,
and the constituents of this threefold complex revolve, occur in
386 SUTRA 1.42
turns, producing alternations of sankalpa and vikalpa (BG).

The same applies to all objects of concentration, among which
the mantra must be mentioned here. Since a mantra in its utterable,
audible form is a physical sound, in the Sankhya scheme it would
be a product of the subtle element of sound (Shabda-tanmatra).
Space (akasha) is the gross element produced from Shabda-tan-
matrd, and the audible sound is described both as an attribute of
space and as having space as its locus. Thus concentrations on an
articulate, audible mantra, until such time as it is refined into and
experienced as a subtler vibration, may be considered as coming
within the realm of concentration on space, one of the five gross
elements which serve as dlambanas of sa-vitarka samadhi. So long
as any of the following (or similar) observations remain in the
mind, full coalescence has not occurred and the meditation is still
alloyed and impure:

«“The mantra is a sequence of syllables.”

-“The mantra has such-and-such particular meaning associated

with it.”

“I am practising the mantra.”

«“The mantra is becoming refined.”

Because the gross thought is a vikalpa by definition, the sa-
vitarka samadhi 1s also called sa-vikalpa, that is, accompanied by
vikalpa (NBB). Because it is still touched by ignorance (avidyd), it
constitutes a lower category of direct perception (apara pratyaksha)
(NBB), as against the transcendental direct perception (para prat-
yaksha) to be explained in the next siitra.
SOTRA 1.43 387
Saitral43  eqferateerat caeceerardaratrdrar

fatter
smrti-pariShuddhau svaripa-shinyevartha-
matra-nirbhasa nir-vitarka

smrti-: (of) memory

pari-Shuddhau: upon purification all-round, upon complete puri-

fication

svaripa-Shinya: devoid of its own form

iva: as it were, as though

artha-matra-: (of) only the object meant

nir-bhasa: \l\luminative

nir-vitarka@: without a gross thought

When there has occurred complete and all-round purification of

memory and (the mind-field) is, as it were, devoid of its own

form and illuminative of only the object signified, it is called the
samadhi without a gross thought (nir-vitarka).
Vyasa’s Commentary

When, however, there has occurred all-round and complete puri-
fication of the memory of the conventional usage and meaning
(sanketa) of the word, then the object signified remains only in its
own form in the samadhi-wisdom (samdadhi-prajfia), which has be-
come devoid of the imaginary cognition and linguistic misconcep-
tions (vikalpa) of the knowledge which results from teaching (Shruta)
and inference (amum@na).

(The object of concentration then) excludes all else and remains
distinctly in the form of its own nature. That is the mir-vitarka
coalescence (samdapatti). That is the transcendental (para) direct
perception (pratyaksha). That is the seed of the teaching (Shruta)
and of the inferential process (anum@na).

Teaching and inferential knowledge (anum@na) originate from
that. That perception and realization (darshana), however, is not
an accompaniment of the teaching and of the inference. Therefore
(it is to be concluded that) the yogi’s realization (darshana) arising
388 SOTRA 1.43
from nir-vitarka samadhi is not intermingled with and confused by
other valid proofs (pramdana). That’s it.

This siitra elucidates the definition of nir-vitarka samapatti:
[Satra:] When there has occurred complete and all-round purifi-
cation of memory and (the mind-field) is, as it were, devoid of its
own form and illuminative of only the object signified, it is called
the samadhi without a gross thought (nir-vitarka).

When the all-round and complete purification of the memory of
the imaginary cognition and linguistic misconceptions (vikalpas) of
the knowledge that originates from the teaching and inferential
processes has occurred,

ewisdom (prajfid) then becomes coloured by the object appre-
hended (grahya) because of its proximity (upa),

eit (wisdom) abandons, as it were, its own nature and form as the
instrument of apprehension (grahana), and

eit takes on the nature and form of the object (paddartha) itself
alone, transformed, as it were, into the nature and form of the
object apprehended (grahya),

that is called the nir-vitarka sama@patti. It is also explained as
follows. Its world, introduced by a unitary intelligence, consists of
the self-nature of the real object (artha-dtman), such that it is a
particular (viShesha) collection of atoms—the “cow” and so forth,
or the “jar” and so forth.

And that particular configuration (sa/iisthana) consists of a com-
mon characteristic (dharma) of the subtle (origins of) elements
having taken on a self-nature. It 1s inferred by the results manifested.
It manifests itself as representing that which has revealed it, given
it appearance. It disappears when another characteristic (dharma)
rises. This characteristic (dharma) is called the whole (avayavin)
constituted of separable parts (avayavas). It 1s that, the one, the
large or the minute, the tangible; it has processes, activity, practi-
cability, motion and efficacious execution (Kriya) as its attribute. It
is non-eternal. It is with such a whole consisting of parts (avayavin)
that practical transactions (vyavahara) are conducted.
SOTRA 1.43 389

But to one in whose opinion “That particular collection (of
atoms) is insubstantial, and the subtle cause is not to be appre-
hended,” when he is free of vikalpa, there being no whole consisting
of parts, it (the concept of a whole) is false knowledge not based in
the nature or form of the respective object. Then (for him) mostly
everything incurs (the possibility of) false knowledge. Also, if there
is no object, then what can even be true knowledge?

Since whatever is apprehended is found to be a whole consti-
tuted of parts, therefore there definitely exists a whole constituted
of parts that, coming into empirical attributes such as largeness,
becomes the object (vishaya) of nir-vitarka samapatti.

Discussion

Some editions** consider Vydsa’s introduction to the sitra to be
part of his commentary on the last siitra and thus place the passage
from the beginning (“When, however, there has occurred. . .”) up
to the end of the third paragraph (“. . . That’s it.”) at the end of
Siitra 1.42. We, however, concur with the majority. The word
“however” at the beginning of the commentary contrasts the sa-
vitarka with the nir-vitarka, and the rest of the paragraph intro-
duces nir-vitarka. This sam@dhi is also called nir-vikalpa because it
is free of that vikalpa which is the superimposition of word, object
and idea upon each other (VM). This superimposition is otherwise
called sanketra, an indication, denotation (VM, VB, NBB, BG, BM)
or conventional usage and meaning of the word. There is no other
relationship between words and ideas except such imagination (vi-
kalpa), which is then held in memory and which in turn helps one
to infer that a word spoken, representing an idea, refers to a given
object (BG, SS, NTC, NTB). Vyasa says:

When, however, there has occurred all-round and complete purifi-
cation of the memory of the conventional usage and meaning
(sanketa) of the word, then the object signified remains only in
its own form in the samddhi-wisdom (samadhv-prajfia) which has
38 (1) NBB, ed Vasudev Shastri Abhyankar, Bombay Sanskrit and Prakrit Series no 46
(Bombay Government Central Press, 1917) and (2) RP
390 SOTRA 1.43

become devoid of the imaginary cognition and linguistic miscon-

ceptions (vikalpa) of the knowledge which results from teaching
(Shruta) and inference (anumdna).
In the tradition of ashram education one attains knowledge
through
Shravana: listening from a teacher,
manana: contemplating, and
nididhyadsana: meditation (NB, BG), which leads to
sakshatkara: realization.
Among the valid proofs, dgama (knowledge derived from inspired
texts, from the tradition, or from a realized teacher) and anumdana
(inference) are both based on remembering what is indicated (savi-
ketita) by the word (VM, VB, BM). For example (VB, NBB), the
Vedic texts (Shrutis) state:

It is indeed the immanent and transcendental Brahman that is

OM.

PrasShna Upanishad V.2

The books of the Law (smrtis) state (VB):

a, u, m—these are Brahm, Vishnu and Shiva.
Similarly, lexicons (as, for instance, Amara-kosha) (VB) state syn-
onyms and meanings.

Learning from these statements 1s called listening (Shravana),
which is the same as receiving knowledge from @gama pram4na.
Thus agama is based on remembering words and their indications
and denotations (VB, NB, BG, NBB). The remembrance or memory
(smrti) comes from the power (Shakti) inherent in words to help
grasp the meaning* (NB, RY).

The logical processes of inference (anumdna) are derived from
39 Source unknown
40 This doctrine of the power (Shakti) of words 1s one of the fundamental principles in
Indian hnguistics but cannot be discussed here in detail
SUTRA 1.43 391
such verbal knowledge. Thus contemplation (manana) of what one
has learnt through Shravana is also based on words (VB, BM, NB).
The word anumana ‘inference’ also includes all that is inferred, all
conclusions (VM). All these vikalpas do not lead to pure knowl-
edge. Therefore the first samadhi (nididhydsana) based on the
vikalpa of words and their relationships is sa-vitarka and does not
lead to perfect realization (sakshadtkara) (VM, VB, NBB, RY).
Hence Vy4sa later states the requirement that there should occur
an

all-round and complete purification of the memory of the con-

ventional usage and meaning (sanketa).
The word is not merely “purification” (Shuddhi) but pari-Shuddhi
‘all-round and complete purification’. It has been translated as
denoting the abandonment and eradication of such memory alto-
gether (VM, VB, NB, NBB, BG, RY, NTC). This means the dis-
solution (pra-laya or pra-vi-laya) of such memory (BR, AD, SS).
The memory being a vrtti, its dissolution into its very causes is its
nirodha. This does not mean, however, that the yogi suffers a loss
of the memory of words and meanings in ordinary life; rather, it
means that he does not carry the memory into samadhi. He does
not use these as Glambanas (supports for the mind) or as objects
of concentration when he is past the sa-vitarka and beginning
entry into nir-vitarka.

At this stage, the practice of meditation becomes free of names
(of objects) and sentences (of contemplation); the object of medita-
tion is dissociated from speech and language. This is total purifica-
tion (HA). Now not only does the yogi not resort to the memory
of words and their denotations, but he leaves behind the entire
process which was caused by the presence of words and indications
(VB, VM, NB, NBB, BG, RY)—of Shravana (that is, 4gama pra-
mana) and manana (that is, anumdna pramana), as well as the
first nididhydsana (that is, sa-vikalpa samadhi), with its lesser de-
gree of sdkshatkara (that is, lower realization), which was described
in the last siitra as impure and alloyed.

This also implies that the method of contemplation (vichGra) as
392. SUTRA 1.43

taught among the followers of Vedanta, when an initiate is given a
profound statement (mahd-vakya) to contemplate, must also be
refined until the contemplation merges into meditation and be-
comes a realization. The words as well as the verbal processes of
contemplation also come under the category of vikalpa. Even
though the original realization of a rshi in samadhi is conveyed in
words, the practising initiate is bound to a vikalpa until the words
are abandoned and he has the same non-verbal realization which
the original rshi had.

Again, we read from Vyasa:

(The object of concentration then) excludes all else and remains
distinctly in the form of its own nature. That is the ur-vwitarka
coalescence (samaGpatti) That is the transcendental (para) direct
perception (pratyaksha) That 1s the seed of the teaching (Shruta)
and of the inferential process (anuidna)

Teaching and inferential knowledge (a/umdana) originate from
that. That perception and realization (darshana), however, ty not
an accompaniment of the teaching and of the inference Therefore
(it 1s to be concluded that) the yogi’s realization (darshana) arising
from mr-vitarka samadhi 1s not intermingled with and contused
by other valid proofs (pramdana) That's it

At this stage the instrument of apprehension (grahana), the mind
with all its faculties, forgets itself, as it were. There is not even the
cognizance that “I perceive” or “IT concentrate.” [he mind ts pos-
sessed, taken over (@vesha), by the object of concentration (dhyera)
(BG), diving deep into the reality of the object of concentration
(dhyeva-artha) (NB, BG). Its attention is focused only on that
reality, as though that reality 1s superimposed upon the mind, as
though the wisdom tn samadhi causes it to abandon any claims to
being an agent of apprehension or concentration (RY) It is as
though the internal process (bAdvand) of samadhi 1s devoid of
“being a process” (bhdvandtva) (SS)

There is now not the shghtest superimposition of the unreal
(VM, VB, NBB); the real and the unreal are fully differentiated
(NB, BG). Nothing unreal enters into the real (HA). The reality
(artha) does not take on fictitious (vikalpita) impositions (BM, SS)
SOTRA 1.43 393
of words and so forth. The commentators reiterate that because
there is not the slightest touch of confusion and ignorance (avidy@)
in this samadhi, it is indeed the transcendental direct perception
(para pratyaksha) of the yogis (VM, NB, NBB, BG, RY).

The reality of the object of apprehension and concentration rises
clearly and shows its own form. The union and coalescence is such
that the mind’s own nature in the process of ideation becomes
subordinated (myag-bhiita) to that of the reality being realized (BR).
It is thus that the phrase

svariipa-Shiinya iva ‘as though devoid of its own form’
with reference to the mind and to the samdpatti becomes meaning-
ful. “As though” expresses the fact that the yogi does not become
mindless, that only the self-awareness of the mind and the cog-
nizance that “I know the object” are lost in the awareness of the
object of samadhi (NTC, HA).

Here an argument ensues (VM): The yogis receive the transcen-
dental knowledge in this higher perception and realization. Then
they convey that knowledge through agama and anumdana, which
are not the subject of that realization. Because @gama and anumdna
are fictitious, the yogi’s knowledge must therefore also be fictitious.
This is answered by Vyasa:

That 1s the seed of the teaching (Shruia) and of the inferential

process (a@numana)....

That perception and realization (darShana), however, is not an

accompaniment of the teaching and of the inference. Therefore

(at is to be concluded that) the yogi’s realization (darShana) arising

from nir-vitarka samadhi 1s not intermingled with and confused

by other valid proofs (pramdna). That’s it.
It 1s not that wherever there is teaching (gama) and inference
(anum4na) true realization exists, nor is it necessary that all reali-
zation be expressed in teaching and inferential processes. Thus
realization is not dependent upon these pramdanas, although it is
their source or origin. The word darshana means “seeing, gaining
394 SUTRA 1.43

insight” into that realization which occurs in samadhi. Darshana is
the Sanskrit word for philosophy because all philosophy, with its
logical processes, is derived from such realization alone.

An origin is not dependent on its effects. Even though perception
of smoke leads to the inference that there is fire, the fire itself is
not dependent on smoke. So it is clear that the yogis receive their
knowledge through non-imaginary, non-fictitious (a-vikalpita) sa-
madhi and use the fiction (vikalpa) of gama and anumdna to
convey the true knowledge (VM). This knowledge is the seed from
which they are brought forth into being (pra-bhiz). Even though
this knowledge is taught in the revealed texts (Shruti) and inspired
lawbooks (smrti) or by a guru, it is impossible to experience it
without the experience of samadhi, just as one cannot experience
the sweetness of sugarcane or rice pudding by description alone.
Nor can a guru give guidance in the matter without that full reali-
zation in which no room for doubt is left and no realities are
reversed. Hence, once again, the valid proofs of @gama and anu-
mana are dependent on it, and not vice versa. No valid proofs
(pramanas) sully the realization in nir-vikalpa samadhi (VB, NBB,
HA).

The argument of the siitra up to here ts summarized by Vyasa as
follows:

This sitra elucidates the definition of sur-vitarka samdapatti.
[Sitra.] When there has occurred complete and all-round
purification of memory and (the mind-field) 1s, as it were,
devoid of its own form and iluminative of only the object
signified, it 1s called the samadhi without a gross thought
(nir-vitarka)

When the all-round and complete purification of the memory

of the imaginary cognition and linguistic misconceptions (vikal-
pas) of the knowledge that originates from the teaching and 1n-
ferential process has occurred,

«wisdom (prajfid) then becomes coloured by the object appre-

hended (grahya) because of its proximity (upa),

«it (wisdom) abandons, as it were, its own nature and form as

the instrument of apprehension (grahana), and
SUTRA 143 395
eit takes on the nature and form of the object (paddartha) itself
alone, transformed, as it were, into the nature and form of the
object apprehended (grahya), .
that is called the nir-vitarka samapatti.

All this has been explained so far.

Now the question arises as to the nature of that reality of the
object of concentration which is realized in this samadhi. The alam-
banas in this samadhi are still the sixteen visheshas and their prod-
ucts. One important aspect of their nature is stated by Vyasa which
refutes views held by certain opponents and reasserts the Sankhya
view.

Taking, for instance, an object such as a jar, the Buddhists of
the Sautrantika and Vaibhashika schools hold that it is simply a
combination of uncountable numbers of atoms, not their trans-
muted product, and that there are not cause and effect relationships
between the atoms and the jar. This is known as the aggregation

-doctrine (sanghdata-vadda).

The Buddhists of the Vijfiana-vada school hold that all the ob-
jects exist merely as ideas, within a universal idea (@laya-vijfidna),
and have no objective existence.

Followers of the Nyaya-Vaisheshika schools hold either to asat-
karya-vada—the doctrine that qualities of effects do not exist in
their causes, but that fresh qualities are produced—or to drambha-
vada—another name for the same doctrine based on the view that
these qualities begin (arambha) fresh in the effects which are pro-
duced when atoms of various elements combine, and that their
prag-abhava (prior absence) in the anterior (the cause) is evident,
that is, that it is known that those qualities were not there previous
to their appearances in fresh objects.

The Sankhya view, of course, is sat-kdrya-vada: that the qualities
of objects pre-exist in their causes and that the gunas are constantly
transmuted in the evolutes and do not remain the same even for a
moment.

Although the commentators have summarized some of the
arguments of the various schools and their refutation by others
396 SUTRA 1.43
pertaining to these doctrines, space does not permit an adequate
discussion of them here. Those interested in the topic may explore
it in the formal systems of Indian philosophy. Only Vydasa’s view
needs to be explained here. He says:
Its world, introduced by a unitary intelligence, consists of the
self-nature of the real object (artha-atman), such that it is a
particular (vishesha) collection of atoms—the “cow” and so forth,
or the “jar” and so forth.
The world (/oka) of the yogi in samadhi is described. The word
loka means “that which shines.” Whatever shines forth in samadhi,
that alone is the yogi’s world. The object of realization that be-
comes his whole world, says Vyasa, is
eka-buddhi-upa-krama ‘introduced by a unitary intelligence (bud-
dhi)’.
The intelligence is unitary because it is not divided up among
many ideas. It is also unitary because it sees the object as a com-
plete whole, one, not merely as many parts, such as atoms, put
together. The object is artha-Atman, that is, it has a real self-
nature. It is neither a non-self (an7-atman or Pali anattd), nor a
mere idea. It m#y be agreed that it is anu-prachaya-vishesha-aGitma
‘a particular collection of atoms’, whereby it becomes, for example,
a cow or a jar that 1s, a sentient or an insentient being or an
object —but what exactly does this mean” Vyasa goes turther:

And that particular configuration (samisthdna) consists of a
common characteristic (dharma) of the subtle (origins of) ele-
ments having taken on a self-nature Et is interred by the results
manitested It manifests itself as representing that which has re-
vealed it, given ttappearance It disappears when another charac-
teristic (dharma) rises Lhis characteristic (dharma) is called the
whole (avayavin) constituted of separable parts (avavavas) Its
that, the one, the large or the minute, the tangible, it has pro-
cesses, activity, practicability, motion and efficacious execution
(Kriya) as its attribute. It is non-eternal. It is with such a whole
consisting of parts (avayavin) that practical transactions (vrava-
hara) are conducted.
SUTRA 143° 397

An effect is neither totally different trom nor totally identical

with its cause. The particular contiguration (sassthdna) of an
object—that substratum in which the qualities (dAarma) of an ob-
ject reside, because of which it 1s that object, without which it
would become transmuted into some other evolute—partakes of
certain characteristics (dharma) of the subtler evolutes from which
it is produced. Thereby it takes on a self-nature (@tma-hhiita); that
is, it becomes itself. The presence of these characteristics is not a
passive, non-productive idea alone. It is efficacious (artha-krivad-
karin), producing certain results by which the observer infers its
characteristics. In other words, it is anointed (afijana) by the attri-
butes of its cause, and it represents that cause which has revealed
it, has given it its appearance as an effect. When another character-
istic from among those hidden in the very cause manifests itself,

the configuration changes again. This will be explained further in

Sitras [1V.12-15. The object in question, however, is the one whole

(avayavin) to which all its separable parts (avavavas) belong. This

one object is (a) one, whether large or minute, and (4) tangible. It

has kKrivd, that is,

processes, activities, practicability, motion, and efficacious exe-

cution.

Because it is ever-changing, it is non-eternal. It is such an object
with which practical transactions are conducted. Furthermore,
Vyasa challenges those opposed to this realism by saying:

But to one in whose opinion “That particular collection (of
atoms) ts insubstantial, and the subtle cause is not to be appre-
hended,” when he is free of viAalpa, there being no whole consist-
ing of parts, it (the concept of a whole) is false knowledge not
based in the nature or form of the respective object Then (for
him) mostly everything incurs (the possibility of) false Knowledge.

Also, if there is no object, then what can even be true knowledge?
Briefly, if everything experienced were insubstantial, unreal and
false, then all knowledge would be false. Not only is this obvious,
but all objects would then be inefficacious, useless, producing no
398 SUTRA 1.43
results whatsoever. Furthermore there could be no objects of con-
centration if there were no objects. Vyasa says:
Since whatever is apprehended is found to be a whole consti-
tuted of parts, therefore there definitely exists a whole constituted
of parts that, coming into empirical attributes such as largeness,
becomes the object (vishaya) of nir-vitarka samdapatti.

The real objects of the practical and empirical world are indeed
the objects of concentration in meditation; they are not merely the
idea or their atoms, but rather the complete whole. That their true
nature is realized internally in samadhi does not mean that their
objective, external nature is denied. Since their full nature is realized
internally, this realization includes the fact of their external reality,
which is also thereby mastered.
SUTRA 1.44 399
Sitral44 vara atrara fittara a
AeAraaqay SqreATay |
etayaiva savichara nirvichara cha
sikshma-vishaya vyakhyata
etaya: by this
eva: just, alone, very one
sa-vichadra: accompanied by subtle thought, vichdra-accompanied
nir-vichara: devoid of subtle thought
cha: also
stikshma-vishaya: having subtle objects as domain
vyakhyata: is explained, defined

In the same way, the samadhi accompanied by subtle thought

(sa-vichGra) and the one devoid of subtle thought (nir-vichara)

are explained.

Vyasa’s Commentary

Between these, that coalescence (samm@patti) is called vichdra-
accompanied which occurs with regard to the subtle aspects of the
elements which are delimited by the experience of space, time and
causes and have manifest characteristics.

In that sam4dhi the subtle aspect of the elements is present as
the supportive factor (@lambana) in the samadhi-wisdom (sama@dhi-
prajfiad) qualified by the ascendant characteristics. This also is to be
grasped by the unitary intelligence alone.

That coalescence, however, 1s called devoid of subtle thought
(n1r-vichadra) which occurs with regard to the subtle aspects of
elements when all their characteristics are non-sequential, their
self-nature comprises all the characteristics, and they are completely
undelimited in every mode by their submerged, ascendant or as-
yet-unrepresented attributes.

That subtle aspect of the element in this very form only, and
becoming a supportive factor by this form alone (eva) and by no
other (eva), colours the samadhi-wisdom by its proximity (upa-
rafy). And when the wisdom (prajfia) becomes as though devoid of
400 SOTRA 1.44
its own form, merely the object remaining, then it is called “devoid
of subtle thought” (nir-vichdara).

Of these, sa-vitarka and nir-vitarka have gross objects and reali-
ties (vastu) as their domain (vishaya), and sa-vichara and _ nir-
vichara have the subtle objects and realities (vastu) as their domain.

Thus, by explaining nir-vitarka, the absence of vikalpa in the
case of both of these has been explained.

Discussion

In the sa-vitarka and nir-vitarka samdpattis the gross elements
in various tangible forms grasped with the external senses are the
objects of concentration and realization. In sa-vichdra and _ nir-
vichara samadhis the five subtle elements (tan-mdtrds) and the
subtle senses are the objects of concentration and realization.

Nyaya-Vaisheshika philosophers, who emphasize investigation
of the physical realities of nature, propound that four gross
elements-—earth, water, fire, and air (but not space)— exist at two
levels of reality tangibie 1mpermanent forms, and intangible per-
manent atoms. The atoms are, obviously, the subtler aspects of the
gross elements The combining of atomic particles produces the
tangible torms of the elements

The Sankhva philosopher does not engage in a discussion of the
atomic nature of elements His primary interest 1s in realities as
nerecived by the personality In Sankhya philosophy, therefore, it
iw the subtle elements (fan-mdirds) that mutate to become the evo-
Fates called the tive gross elements: Phe more syvncretic philosophers,
Whore not caretid to distinguish between the formal technicalities
Shoe so patat. philosophical systems are tempted to equate the
Sonkbya coneept of ra-mdtrds with the Varsheshika concept of
atoms Phas has led to a contuston among )ova-siitras commen-
tetor ON VES BO ONBONBB. RY. BM) as to the picerse relationship
hetweon (a) the tangeble gross elements and the forms produced by
thoes (4) ther witinuible atoms, and (©) the tive subtle elements
Cum onary) Most of them (VM, VB. NB. NBB, RY) ate agreed
that ctoms come within the subtle realities realized ino sa-vichara
and wa vich ras cmadpatty,
SOTRA 1.44 401
It is just possible that Vyasa has used the term
bhita-siikshma ‘subtle (aspects) of elements’,
and not suékshma-bhiita ‘subtle elements’ (tan-matras), in order to
imply inclusion of the intangible atomic reality of the elements.
Even though there is no other ground to support this view, it
appears best here to respect the various commentators who quite
correctly have found a place for the atomic reality among the
various levels of reality to be realized in respective samapattis.
Even though Vydsa in explaining the last siitra does state that a
tangible object is a particular collection of atoms (anu-prachaya-
viShesha), it was made clear that in the nir-vitarka samadhi the
entire whole (ayayavin), and not such parts (avayavas) as atomic
particles, are realized. It seems obvious, thercfore, that both the
subtle atomic aspect of the gross elements and the five subtle ele-_ _
ments themselves are reatizvéd in the sa-vichara and _ nir-vichara
samadhis. But these two subtle realities should not be misidentified
with each other.
Now to Vy4sa’s statement:
Between these, that coalescence (sama@pattt) 1s called vichdra-
accompanied which occurs with regard to the subtle aspects of
the elements which are delimited by the experience of space, time
and causes and have manifest characteristics.
The distinction between sa-vitarka and nir-vitarka was stated to be
that in sa-vwetarka the vikalpa of word, object and idea is present,
whereas in nir-vitarka it 1s absent. In sa-vichdra the object of con-
centration 1s experienced with reference to space, time and causa-
tion. Fven though the minutest particles occupy no space, a rela~
tionship in space 1s attributed to them, the detailed mechanism of
which 1s a specialized field for Vaisheshiha philosophers (and
modern physicists) The same applies to time. which will be further
discussed in Siitras 1V.12-15 Causation here refers to the fact of
the subtle, atomic realities of the gross elements being products of
the respective tan-matrds (VM, NB, NBB. RY, HA) VB, on the
402 SUTRA 1.44
other hand, holds that causation (imitta) here refers to the rela-
tionship of the elements with the conscious purusha, the efficient
cause whose purpose the elements serve. This seems farfetched,
because such causation is not limited to the subtle aspects of the
elements alone. Even though the word nimitta normally refers to
an efficient cause, here it has to be taken in the broader sense of
any causative factor. Even the subtle elements’ process of producing
respective effects may be included (RY). Briefly, again, the objects
of concentration in sa-vichara samadhi are perceived as delimited
in relation to space, time and causation and, says Vyasa, have
manifest characteristics, which he clarifies as follows:
In that samadhi the subtle aspect of the elements is present as

the supportive factor (alambana) in the samadhi-wisdom (samadhi-

prajfa) qualified by the ascendant characteristics.

This statement may be understood better in the light of the three
states of characteristics listed in Vyasa’s next paragraph. There it is
stated that the characteristics of an evolute may be (a) submerged,
(b) ascendant, or (c) as yet unrepresented. An object has many
attributes which become manifested from time to time while others
become dormant or await being brought into manifestation from
the dormant state. When certain attributes have already made an
appearance, after a while they become submerged and are called
the past Those that now become ascendant are in the present.
Those yet to be manifested are in the obyect’s future.

In sa-vichara samadhi concentration on and realization of the
nature of the object 1s limited only to those characteristics which
are manifest, ascendant, in the present. The wisdom (prajfa) thus
received is delimited. However, Vy4sa says:

This also 15 to be grasped by the unitary intelligence alone.

To summarize the rest of Vyasa’s commentary on this sitra, it is
clear that in contrast to sa-vichara, the awakening wisdom (prajfa)
in nir-vichara comprises the entirety of the object of concentration.
The object here is not delimited by space, time or causation, nor
SUTRA 1.44 403
limited to those attributes which are apparent only in its present
time. All of its possibilities and potentials are realized as being one
with an undivided and unitary intelligence (buddhi). Vyasa is very
emphatic in stating that the objects here are

sarva-dharma-anu-patin: such that they relate to all their charac-
teristics (and)
sarva-dharma-adtmaka: such that their self-nature comprises all
their characteristics
sarvatha: in every possible way
sarvatah: from whichever possible mode.
In the next sentence Vyasa uses “the very one” or “the only one”
(Ai) once, and “only” or “alone” (eva) twice. He says:

That subtle aspect of the element in this very form only (Ai),
and becoming a supportive factor by this form alone (eva) and
by no other (eva), colours the samadhi-wisdom by its proximity
(upa-rafij).

The discussion in Sitra 1.17 has already explained what is meant
by the mind (“wisdom” in Vyasa’s commentary) being as though
devoid of its own form, with merely the object remaining. There
are, however, disagreements among commentators on two points.
In the opinion of some (VM, BR, BG, SS, NTC, BM), the sa-
vichara and sa-vitarka samadhis share the state of vikalpa of the
divisions of the word-object-idea triad, and nir-vichara, like nir-
vitarka, is free of such vikalpa. Others (VB, NB, NBB, HA) disagree
and state clearly that since such vikalpa has already been aban-
doned in nir-vitarka, which is a lower samadhi, how can it continue
to be pursued in the next higher stage, which 1s sa-vichdra? This
seems to be more in accord with Vyasa, who says:

Thus, by explaining mir-vitarka, the absence of vikalpa in the
case of both of these has been explained.
404 SOTRA 145
Sitral45  qeatavard afayriaara
sikshma-vishayatvam chalinga-paryavasanam
siikshma-: subtle the state of having
vishayatvam: the state of having as objects subtle objects
cha: and
a-linga-: without marks, unmodified prakrti
pary-avasGnam: extending up to, ending at
And “having subtle objects” extends up to unmodified prakrti.
Vyasa’s Commentary

The subtle realm of an object related to the atoms of the earth
element is the odour tan-mdtra; of the water element is the flavour
tan-matrda; of the light or fire element is the visibility (or form)
tan-matra; of the gaseous element is the tangibility tan-matra; of
the space element is the sound tan-mdatrda.

The (subtle realm) of these tan-mdtrds is ego (aharhkara). The
subtle realm of even this ahamkara 1s linga-mdtra (mahat). The
a-linga (prakrti) is the subtle domain of even the /ifga-mdtra. There
is nothing subtler beyond a-linga (prakrti).

Now, purusha also 1s subtle, 1s that not so? True. But the subtlety
of purusha is not in the same category as that of a-litga beyond
the /inga Furthermore, purusha 1s not the material cause of /iriga
but an efficient cause. [hus the unexcelled subtlety as it is in
prakiti has been explained

Discussion

The relationships among the various evolutes of prakrti were
somewhat explained in the overview of Sankhya-yoga (Part 2 of
the General Introduction to this volume) and in the paraphrase ot
the Jarive-samdsa-sitras (Part 3 of the General Introduction).
These will be further studied in Sitra If 19. Two charts from the
overview of Sankhya-yoga (on pp 34 and 35) are repeated here to
help clarify this scheme.
SOTRA 145 405
prakyti
1 mahat or buddhi faculty of discrimination,
intelligence or intellection;
the first vehicle of purusha
2. ahamkara ego, the principle of self-
Jn identification
(sattvic) (tamasic)
rajasic
aharhkara
umpelling both
mind
3-13. ) 5 cognitive senses
5 active senses
14-18 5 subtle elements
(tan-matras) /
19-23 5 gross elements
(bhiitas or tattvas):
earth, water,
fire, air, space
406 SOTRA 145
Yoga-siitra 11.19 gives alternative explanatory titles as follows:
prakti } a-linga, without a distinguishing
mark
1, mahat } hhemane merely a mark but
with no distinguishing features

2-7. aharhkdra and «bth ene non-specific,

5 tan-matras intermediate links between mahat

(subtle elements) and the final 16 products

8-23. mind and |

5 cognitive senses

5 active senses visheshas, specific, final 16 products

5 bhiitas (gross

elements)

Further explanatory details of these may be studied in the works
on Sankhya philosophy.

Three words used by Vyasa should be well understood: (1) /inga,
(2) linga-matra, and (3) a-linga. The conventional (r#dhi) meaning
of the word /inga is “a mark” or “a sign.” Because a subtle energy
or evolute cannot by itself be observed, its grosser evolutes serve as
its manifestations, the marks or signs of its presence. The derivative
(vaugika) meaning of the word linga is “that which dissolves, van-
ishes, dis-appears,” from the verb root /i. The products, effects,
evolutes, alter or cease their appearance in the evolute mode as
they vanish and dissolve back into their subtler causes, as a jar
dissolves into clay in the process of prati-safichara (TSS 7) or
prati-prasava (YS 1V.34). For this reason all the twenty-three evo-
lutes (TSS 2, 3) are called linga.
SOTRA 145 407

Mahat, however, is called liriga-mdtra, “a mere sign.” It has no
other special distinguishing marks. Because of its sattvic nature, it
has no form but merely the capacity to receive purusha’s reflection,
as explained in defining asmita (YS 1.8,17,36; 11.6,19).

Prakrti, the equilibrium of gunas, dissolves into nothing further;
therefore, it is non-liriga (a-linga).

As explained in Sitras I.17 and 1.42-44, after concentration on
the five gross elements has perfected the sa-vitarka and nir-vitarka
samapattis, meditation progresses to the realization of the subtler
principles, such as the corresponding tan-matras, into which a per-
son’s consciousness of the gross elements is dissolved.

Vyasa takes pains to emphasize that the reference to the subtle
objects of concentration (sikshma-vishaya) in the last sitra does
not mean that only atoms (paramdnus or anus) and the subtle
elements (tan-mdtrdas) constitute the limit of the subtle realm. Such
a mistake could be made because objects of concentration in the
vichara-accompanied samadhi are the subtle elements and the sub-
tle senses, and Siitra 1.44 speaks of the savichara and nir-vichara
samapattis as being realizations of the subtle realm. The subtle
realm does not end there but extends all the way up to the higher
samprajfhatas, where ahamkara and linga-mdtra (mahat) are realized.
Thereafter a-liiga, the nonquantitative principal matter, prakrti, is
understood.

Another important point needs to be made here: Even though
the formal Sankhya system considers prakyti to be beyond any
cognition at all—too shy a maiden to show her face to purusha’s
consciousness—she is mastered by prakrti-layas, as Patafijali and
Vyasa have pointed out in Sitra 1.19. Thus the yogi’s subtle realm
extends all the way up to prakrti. But, as Vyasa says,

There is nothing subtler beyond a-iinga (prakrti).

Vyasa now answers another question:

Now, purusha also is subtle, is that not so? True. But the
subtlety of purusha is not in the same category as that of a-linga
beyond the /iriga. Furthermore, purusha is not the material cause
408 SUTRA 1.45

of linga but an efficient cause. Thus the unexcelled subtlety as it

is in prakyti has been explained.
Purusha is not an object of concentration. He is subtle but in an
entirely different category from prakrti and its evolutes. Whereas
the grades of subtlety in praksti’s evolutes are comparative, puru-
sha’s subtlety is not relative but absolute. Unlike prakrti, purusha
has no products as its effects. He is an indirect cause of the aware-
ness asmi, “I am,” that makes its appearance in the composite
sentience (asmita) when purusha’s presence passively reflects in
linga-matra. That is the entire extent of his involvement.

Since the topic of these sittras is sammprajridta samadhi, and it is
not till the asamprajfidta that purusha’s isolation occurs, the de-
grees of subtleness mentioned here lead only up to prakrti.

A question arises: Bearing in mind that Sitras 1.47-S0 extol the
perfection of nir-vicha@ra samadhi and that Sitra 1.51 explains asam-
prajfidta samadhi, what happened to the Gnanda-accompanied and
asmitd-accompanied samadhis which were included in Sitra 1.17?
Though this has not been answered by Vy4sa or any of the com-
mentators, it appears that the term nir-vichara is not limited to
being a variation of the vich@ra-accompanied samadhi alone. The
term has to be taken in a broader sense to include the other two
samadhis, which appear to have been left out here. There are two
reasons why this is so:
|. The higher two samadhis also are in this sense ur-vichadra sama-

pattis because the accompaniment of subtle thought has ceased.

The experience in Gnanda-accompanied samadhi is “I am in

rapture,” and in asmutd-accompanied samadhi it is simply “I

am.” [hese are neither discursive thoughts associated with virarka-

accompanied samadhi nor subtle thoughts of wiehdra-accom-
panied samadhi, but rather experiences in nur-vichara samapattt.

2 The subtle realm of samadhi extending up to prakrti implies
recognition of the other two samiprajfdtas.

Since there are such significant differences of opinion or inter-
pretation among the commentators on this sitra, no reference has
been made to them.
SOTRA 1.46 409
Satral.46 alwaadra: ante:
ta eva sa-bijah samadhih
tah: those
eva: very ones
sa-bijah: with seed, seeded
samadhih: samadhi
Those very ones are the samadhi with seed.
Vyasa’s Commentary
Those four sam4pattis have exterior realities as their seeds; thus
samadhi, too, is with seed (sa-bija). Of these, sa-vitarka and nir-
vitarka are (concentrations on) the gross object and sa-vichadra and
nir-vichara are on the subtle object. Thus is samadhi counted to be
fourfold.
Discussion
Most commentators (VM, VB, NB, NBB, BG, NTB, RY, BM)
have struggled with this siitra, trying to resolve the apparent con-
tradiction in the number of samadhis. Ignoring Vy4sa’s clear state-
ment, these commentators have said that there are eight (VM,
NTB, RY, BM) or six (VB, NBB) kinds of samadhi and have tried
to determine the exact position of the Gnanda-accompanied and
the asmitd-accompanied samadhis with reference to the four sama-
pattis. It 1s unimportant to present their enumerations, classifica-
tions and differing arguments. Suffice it to say that Vyasa has not
stated that there are four kinds of samadhi but rather that they are
chaturdha, “divided fourfold.” As explained in the last sitra, the
division is as follows:
sa-vilarkha samdpatti = sa-vitarka samadhi
nir-vitarkha sam@patti = nir-vitarka samadhi
sa-vichara sama@patn = sa-vichara samadhi
nir-vichara samadhi
nir-vichara samapatti =} Gnanda-accompanied samadhi
asmita-accompanted samadhi
410 SOTRA 1.46

All of these, being concentrations on and realizations of support-
ive factors (alambanas), are samadhis with seed (BR, BM). Some
commentators (NB, BG) say that they cause sarhskaras which serve
as the seed of the elimination of sorrow and hence they are sa-bija;
this is obviously incorrect—otherwise how would this category of
samadhi be contrasted with the seedless (nir-bija), which is the
final freedom from sorrow? Others (NBB, RY, NTB, NTC, SS) say
accurately that it is sa-bija because it yet contains the seed of
bondage. Since the yogi has still not reached the discriminating
wisdom (viveka-khyati), his concentrations are on realities that are
within the composite person and exterior to purusha.
SOTRA 147 411
Sitral47 «9 Faterareerereerseareavara:
nirvichara-vaisharadye’dhyatma-prasadah
nir-vichara-vaisharadye: upon purification and proficiency of nir-
vichara
adhyatma-: spiritual, in regard to 4tman
prasadah: pleasant clearness

Upon reaching the purity and proficiency of nir-vichara, the

yogi gains spiritual clearness.

Vyiasa’s Commentary

Luminosity is the self-nature of the sattva of buddhi. “Proficiency
and purity” (vaishdradya) means that the maculateness (mala) of
the veil of impurity is removed from it and its stable flow, un-
subjugated by rajas and tamas, is clear.

When the proficiency (vaifharadya) of nir-vichara samadhi has
occurred, then there ensues the yogi’s spiritual clarity (prasdda),
which is the illumination of wisdom (prajfa) revealed (sphuta)
with regard to the realm of matters as they are, and without being
obstructed by sequence.

As it 1s said:

Having risen to the clarity (pras@da) of wisdom (prajfia),

the wise man, no more to be grieved for,

looks upon grieving people

as one on a mountaintop (views) those on the ground (below).
Discussion

This sitra describes the lucid beauty of the nir-vichdra state
(VM) as follows:

Impurity means the accumulation of rajas and tamas (VM, MB)
as well as the vice, etc. which cause their growth (VB, NBB). The
same is the taint, macula, maculateness (ma/a), that becomes a veil
(VM, VB, NBB) consisting of instability and dullness (HA). Even
though the sattva of buddhi is naturally luminous, luminosity being
412. SOTRA 1.47
its very self-nature (prakasha-atman), it loses its immaculate nature
when it becomes subdued by such a stain. When it is no longer
tainted, purification and spiritual proficiency (vaisharadya) occurs.
This means that the mind-field becomes free of afflictions (klesha)
and the resultant propensities (vasan@s) and is thereby capable of
a stable flow (BR). Vaisharadya is further defined as that stream
of concentration (ekagrata-dhadra@), synonymous with stable flow,
which receives and reflects back the clearly reflected image of the
entire whole as well as the particular aspects of the object of medi-
tation (dhyeya) (VB, NB, NBB, BG, RY). Briefly, this proficiency
means the mind’s firmness in its stability (BR, AD). Consequently
‘it also means that because of the expertise in advanced practice
(abhydsa) (BR, SS), the material aspects all the way to prakrti are
subordinated and the power of consciousness (chiti-Shakti) is ascen-
dant (SS).

A question arises as to the use of the word adhy4@tma ‘spiritual’.
Since the field of sammprajfiata samadhi consists yet of objects ex-
terior to purusha, how can there already occur an awareness of the
spiritual self (adhi-atman)? This can be answered in two ways.
First, the word atman does not always mean the spiritual self. This
word is frequently used in the reflexive sense of “oneself.” Adhy-
Gtma here means the development of oneself inward, towards one’s
spiritual nature and the faculties controlled by the self (TSS 8).
Here its field 1s limited to buddhi (VB, NB, NBB, BG, HA), al-
though some commentaries mistaking this siitra as referring to
asamprajrfidta (SS) erroneously include purusha (NBB) or the spirit-
ual self (RY). One should not argue too much against this because
the final result of samprajfiata is discriminating wisdom whereby
the ‘orce cf the power of consciousness (chiti-Shakti) is realized
(SS) as the origin of all one’s awareness.

But Vyd4sa clarifies that the primary intent of the words “spiritual
clarity ” (adhyGtma-pras@da) here is that

there ensuc- the yogi’s spiritual clarity (pras@da), which is the
ulumination of wisdom (prajfia) revealed (sphuza) with regard to
the realm of matters as they are, and without being obstructed by
sequence.
SOTRA 147 413
The wording here is very suggestive. It reminds one of Vydsa’s
passage on Sitra I.1:
That, however, is called samadhi of wisdom (samprajfiata yoga),
which in a one-pointed mind-field
fully illuminates an actual state or object that has become
real, has been realized,
e diminishes the afflictions and impurities (k/eshas),
e loosens the bonds of karma, and
«brings about the possibility of control (nirodha) face to face,
as it were.

All these promises of samadhi are being fulfilled in this siitra.
Not only does the pleasant clarity (pras@da) as explained in Siitra
I.16 occur, but also the same prasddana promised through the
mind-purifications (pari-karmas) in 1.33 and the following siitras is
gained. The light of wisdom shines, illuminates, the objects of
concentration without reference to sequence of moments or states;
it sheds light simultaneously upon their entirety without being hin-
dered in any way.

In the verse from the Mahabharata which Vyasa quotes, the
word prasdda also suggests prasdda ‘a palace’. The yogi has climbed
upon the palace of purity, from where, as a sovereign, he observes
those below, but not in pride. Anu-pashyati suggests that he looks
after and cares for them in compassion. “No more to be grieved
for, (he observes the) grieving people” also carries this message: So
long as a human being remains in such a pitiable, ignorant condi-
tion that others should sympathize with and grieve for him, he
considers others to be happier than himself, and thinks that he
alone has fallen into sorrows; but the yogi is now happy and sees
those below him as sorrowful (VB, NBB), suffering the three kinds
of pain (VM) as defined in TSS 23.
414 SUTRA 1.48
Siitra 1.48 BEATA AA WAT
rtambhara tatra prajfia
rtam-bhard: Truth-bearer, Truth-bearing, bearer of Supreme Truth
tatra: there
prajfia: wisdom
Therein occurs that wisdom which bears the Supreme Truth
(ta).
Vyasa’s Commentary
The wisdom (prajfia) that accrues when the mind-field has
reached samadhi in that (nir-vichara samGpatti) has the appellation
“bearer of Supreme Truth” (rtam-bhara). The meaning befits its
name because it bears Truth alone. Nor is there even a modicum of
falsified knowledge. As is said,
By authority (@gamawind by logic (anumdna),
And by enjoyment of the practice (abhyasa)
of meditation (dhyana),
Cultivating wisdom in three ways
One gains the highest yoga.
Discussion
The ancientmost word for the Supreme Truth of universal and
divine laws is rta, extolled in many hymns of the Rg-veda. The
Vedic sages (rshis) constantly sought, strived for and prayed for
that wisdom in which the knowledge of ria is revealed.4! According
to the tradition (VB, VM, BG), rtam-bhard (the bearer of Truth) is
the technical term (tantriki paribhasha) used within the circle of
yogis for the realization that occurs in the mir-vichadra samadhis. It
does not occur in sa-vitarka and nir-vitarka samadhis because they
are alloyed with imaginary cognitions (vikalpa), as explained in
Sutra 1.42. This rram-bhard is never veiled by perversive cognition
(viparyaya) (BR, AD), for it bears unalterable (a-vika/pita) Truth
41 For further study of this concept in the Vedas see Raimundo Pamikkar, The Vedic
Experience Mantra-manjart (Berkeley and Los Angeles University of California Press,
1977)
SUTRA 148 415
(RY). Commentators mistaking this sfitra to refer to asamprajfata
also say that it bears, brings forth, the knowledge of the absolute
purusha (NB, BG, NTC, SS) and is synonymous with dharma-
megha (SS). But that is inaccurate, as others (VB) point out that
the word “therein” (tatra) refers to sa-bija samadhi, spoken of in
Siitra 1.46, and even there, only to the highest of the sa-bija,
namely, asmita-accompanied samadhi (N BB).

The source of the verse quoted by Vyasa is unknown and is
probably from some lost text. The three ways of cultivating wisdom,
namely authority (@gama), logic or inference (anumdna) and the
practice of meditation (dhydna-abhy4sa), are again equated, respec-
tively, with Shravana (hearing the teaching), manana (contemplat-
ing) and nididhydsana (meditating). These are common to all tradi-
tions and have been referred to earlier in Siittra 1.43. The efficacy
of the first two, @gama and anumana, will be emphatically denied
in the next siitra; and here they are given perhaps only to introduce
their forthcoming dismissal.

The phrase

dhyana-abhyasa-rasa
is quite meaningful, as it points out that mere practice of dhydna is
inefficient without rasa, which means “due respect” (G@dara) (VM,
VB), as was explained in Siitra 1.14. Furthermore, the word rasa
also means “essence,” “flavour” and “enjoyment.” One seeking to
receive Truth-bearing wisdom should take pleasure in and enjoy
the flavourful essence of the practice of meditation.
416 SUTRA 1.49
Sitral49 | - Tarqarewarvarraterear fererardeara
Shrutéanumiana-prajiabhyam anya-vishaya
vishesharthatvat
Shruta-: (from) tradition, learning, hearing
anumana-: (from) logical processes, logic, inference
prajiabhyam: (from two kinds of) wisdom
anya-: (having) different, other
vishayd: scope, field, object, domain, realm
vishesha-arthatvat: because of having special purpose, aim, sig-
nificance

(Truth-bearing wisdom) is different in scope from the wisdom

gained by learning or from processes of logic because it has a

special aim, that of dealing with particulars.

Vyasa’s Commentary
Now, that

[Sdtra.] (Truth-bearing wisdom) 1s different in scope from the

wisdom gained by learning or from processes of logic because it

has a special aim, that of dealing with particulars
Scriptural authority and the teaching received orally (Shruta) is the
same as the knowledge conveyed within the Ggama proof category.
The field is generalities. The @gama cannot communicate the par-
ticular. Why (not)? Because a word 1s not established 1n its signifi-
cation with reference to the particular. Also, the field of inference
1s already the general It 1s said that wherever there 1s arrival or
attainment (prapti), there is locomotion or endeavour (gati). Fur-
thermore, inference leads to a conclusion (only) through a generality.
Therefore no particular (vishesha) 1s the field of teaching (Shruta)
and inference (anumdana)

Nor can this subtle, concealed and distant reality (vastu) be
grasped with direct mundane perception (/oka-pratyaksha). Nor
(should it be thought that) because there 1s no proof for the par-
ticular, it is non-existent. It can be grasped only through samadhi-
SOTRA 149 417
wisdom, whether it occurs in the subtle aspects of the elements
(bhita-siikshma) or in the spiritual self (purusha). Therefore, that
wisdom is different in scope from the wisdom gained by learning
or from the processes of logic, because it has a special aim, that of
dealing with particulars.

Discussion

It was stated in the last siitra that one receives wisdom from
authoritative teaching (Shruta and @gama) and from the processes
of logic, that is, inference (anumdna). Concentration on realities
which have been understood through these means leads a yogi to
nir-vichara samapatti. That being the case, nir-vicha@ra would suc-
ceed in helping to realize the subjects of Shruta and anumdna only
because a mental impression (sarnskara) created from observation
of one object is incapable of producing knowledge of a different
object. Following the same line of thought further, it would then
appear that if nir-vichadra produces Truth-bearing wisdom, Shruta
and anumana should also be able to produce the same (VM). Then
what purpose is served by yoga (VB, NB, NBB, BG)? The response
to this objection is as follows: The nature of the sattva of buddhi is
illumination. It 1s capable of observing all matters, but since buddhi
is covered and obscured by tamas, it is only when rajas opens a
way that the sattva of buddhi grasps any reality. However, when
the maculation of both rajas and tamas is washed off through
practice (abhydsa) and dispassion (vairdgya), then buddhi’s clarity
shines forth and all boundaries and limitations imposed by external
proofs burst through. There is only endless light. What then can be
left unilluminated (VM, RY)?

The field of shruta and anumdna is indeed apart from that of nir-
vichara samadhi. Words are incapable of producing knowledge of
particulars. The word “cow,” for example, cannot refer to each in-
dividual cow separately because there are simply an endless number
and variety (HA) of them, nor can they all be present simultaneously
as a singularity. Furthermore, one can be confused with another
(VM, VB, NB, NBB, BG, RY). As to the efficacy of inference
(anum4na) to reveal particulars, its failure was already pointed out
in Sitras 1.7 and 1.43. For instance, a statement of concomitance,
418 SUTRA 1.49

such as “Wherever something is seen to have arrived, it must have
moved,” is based on generalities or commonalities, and all con-
clusions drawn are based on connecting the common attributes.
Only direct perception gives knowledge of anything particular; but
the direct perception of Truth-bearing wisdom is entirely different
in scope from that of the direct perception with senses in the
ordinary world (/oka-pratyaksha). In the Truth-bearing wisdom
even those subtle, concealed or distant realities, which are closed
to direct perception, become known to the yogis with respect both
to their subtle, material aspects and to their spiritual aspects (VM,
HA). All aspects of such realities are realized in their entirety all at
once (BM).

The things which the senses are incapable of grasping are what
is grasped in nir-vichara samadhi. And that particular nature of
the subtle evolutes and atoms on one hand and of the spiritual
realities on the other is what is validated by the yogi’s direct percep-
tion (yogi-pratyaksha) (VM).

It may be asked that since direct perception in the philosophy of
logic requires close contact between a perceiver’s senses and the
object perceived (Gotama’s Nydya-sittra 1), how can a yogi perceive
the subtle, the hidden or the distant which 1s beyond such contact?
The answer 1s that the internal sense (antah-karana) 1s undivided
and all-pervading. It is in close contact with all realities at all
times. Once again, when rajas and tamas are washed off, it per-
ceives without hindrance those realities which are too subtle, hidden
or distant for the occluded external senses (VB). This direct experi-
ence also replaces the need for any external physical proof of the
eaistence of such higher reality.

One might ask how the inner sense, an evolute of prakrti, can
grasp the reality of the particular spiritual self (purusha). The
answer is that since the present discussion is about the Truth-
bearing wisdom of nir-vichara and the realization of purusha occurs
only in asamprajfata, it is only the spiritual reality of purusha’s
reflected presence in asta that 1s intended here by Vyasa (HA)
Furthermore, the discussion on the inefficacy of shruta and anumana
with regard to the experience of asamprajfidta applies equally to
the final realization of the spiritual self.
SUTRA ISO 419
Stra 1.50  avw: dearetsardearcateraceft
taj-jah sarnskaro’nya-sarskara-pratibandhi
tat-jah: arising from that, produced from that
samskarah: sarhskara, impression, imprint in the subtle domain
(karmaShaya)
anya-: (of) other
samskara-: sarhskaras
prati-bandhi: that which impedes, hinders, resists, opposes, checks,
inhibits, blocks, prevents, annuls
The imprint (samskara) produced from that (samadhi-wisdom)
opposes and annuls other sarhskaras.
Vyasa’s Commentary

Upon attainment of samadhi-wisdom, the yogi’s sarhskara pro-
duced by that wisdom is continuously renewed, being repeatedly
strengthened afresh.

[Satra:] The imprint (sarnskara) produced from that (samadhi-
wisdom) opposes and annuls other sarhsk4ras.

The imprint (sarhsk4ra) produced by the samadhi-wisdom im-
pedes (bddh) the domain (a@shaya) of the sarhskaras of worldly
disturbance (vyutthdna). Once the vyutthGna-sathnskaras are over-
powered, the cognitions (pratyayas) arising from them no longer
occur. Upon control and cessation (nirodha) of the cognitions
(pratyayas), samadhi presents itself. Thence the wisdom (prajfia)
born of samadhi; thence the samskaras created from the wisdom;
thus accumulation (ashaya) of (such) sathskaras repeated anew.
Thence wisdom; thence (again) the sarnskaras—thus.

How is it possible that this accumulation of sarnskdras in their
domain will not give power (adhikara) to the mind-field? The sarh-
skaras created by wisdom (prajfid), being the means (hetu) of the
reduction (kshaya) of afflictions (k/eshas), do not cause the mind~-
field to become possessed (vi-shishta) of such power (adhikdra).
420 SOTRA I.50
They, in fact, cause the mind-field to exhaust and turn away from
its act (kdrya). Indeed, the mind-field’s endeavour terminates at
discriminating wisdom (khy@ti).

Discussion

The reader should bear in mind that the word “wisdom” (prajfia)
conveys the same sense as was explained in Sutra I.17: the realiza-
tion attained in sam-prajftata samadhi. The word vyutthana is the
antonym of samadhi and means “worldly involvement,” as used in
Sitras I.3 and 1.14. The sarhnskaras accumulating in their domain
in the subtle body form the sarmskdra-ashaya, as explained in
Sitra 1.24.

As the sarhskadras of samadhi gather force and are constantly
renewed, the vyutth@na-sathskaras weaken. The old G@sShaya is re-
placed with continuously replenished new sarhskaras of samadhi,
which produces the wisdom of realizations, which again reinforces
the sarnskaras of samadhi. Thus the cycle of vrttis and worldly
sarnskaras described in Sitra I.5 is broken. Because these sarh-
skaras of the wisdom of samadhi are of the unafflicted (a-klishta)
kind, they do not add to that power (adhikdra) of the mind-field
which draws one’s awareness into the external world. The mind-
field’s power to serve as the vehicle of ignorance (avidya) and I-
am-ness (asmitd) is therefore weakened. Upon attainment of dis-
criminating wisdom its function ceases except as an instrument
totally under the yogi’s command. (The continuity of this residue
of sarnskaras was explained in Sitra 1.18.)

This siitra indicates the fruit and result of the Truth-bearing
wisdom (rtambhard prajfa) of the last two siitras (BR). A question
arises, however, as to the ability of the newly acquired samadhi
samsk4ras to overcome the vyutthana samskaras. Some commen-
tators argue that it may be that samprajfidta practised with the
proper methods (upd@yas) leads to higher realizations (VM), but it
1s actually as powerless before the beginningless (see Sitra 1.4)
worldly samsk4ras as a tiny candle flame before a stormy wind
(VM, NBB); also the sarhskaras of past enjoyments (bhoga) of the
senses are too powerful to let it become stable (RY). The present
SOTRA 150 421
siitra answers this argument. The word “that” (tat) in the sitra
refers to the nir-vichara samapatti (VM). It is the nature of buddhi
to be attracted towards reality (bhita-artha) (see Siitras 1.1 and
1.47). It wanders confused only until it finds the true nature (attva).
Having found the true nature of things, buddhi becomes established
towards it (VM, NBB). Samskaras of this stability produce a like
buddhi, and thus the new cycle breaks the former beginningless
cycle of ignorance of tattva and the like buddhi (VM). This samadhi
produces sarhsk4ras of a real nature (tattva) which impede opposing,
or non-that-ness (a-tattva), sarnskaras (BR, RY). This bias of buddhi
towards reality is accepted even in other philosophical systems (as,
for example Kumarila’s Pramana-varttika 111.222) (VM, NBB).

What is the meaning of prati-bandh in the siitra? That the wisdom
impedes (badh) the other sarnskaras. That is, it prevents their ef-
fects (VB), namely the vrttis (NB) or their memory (smrti) (BG). It
renders them inefficacious, incapable of functioning (BR). This
refers only to the sarnskdras that are dormant in their domain. The
word @shaya (from @ + shi) means “that which sleeps” (VB, NBB).
The reference, then, is not to those sarnskdras which have already
become awakened as vrttis or as results and fruits of past actions,
but to those which yet lie dormant (VB, NBB). It also opposes the
sathskdras produced from the distracted (vikshipta) ground (HA),
one of the five grounds (bhdmis) of the mind-field (see Sttra I.1).
The growth of the wisdom-samskara is the same as the diminu-
tion of the vikshepa-samskaras; the two are simultaneous (HA).
However, only the unbroken flow of the stream of one-pointedness
(ekagrata-dhdGra) is effective (NB).

Now, when a certain realization (prajfia@) has occurred in sam-
prajfiata samadhi, does that then suffice to overcome the power of
the worldly sarnskdras (VB, NBB)? In addition, when a yogi has
once accomplished samprajfdta, why must he then keep practising
it repeatedly (VB, NB, BG)? Repeated experience of samprajridta
confirms and strengthens its sarhskaras, without which the worldly
vyutthana-samskaras will keep arising. A single experience alone
does not thwart them, but the opposing sathskaras of repeated
practice gradually attentuate them, thin them down (tani-karana)
422 SOTRA 1.50

(YS 11.2,4,10). Thus a cycle of samadhi-wisdom-sarhskara-samadhi
ensues, and the cycle of sarhnskaras and vrttis diminishes in power.
When the final realization (prajfid) occurs, the power of the vyut-
thdna-samskaras ceases. In other words the Vedanta view that
knowledge (jfiana) alone leads to liberation is accurate only with
reference to the ultimate wisdom, but first the attenuation (tana-
karana) of the worldly sarnskaras by cultivating the samadhi-
sarmskaras must occur and reach its perfection (VB, NBB). The
statement that the realization of this wisdom diminishes and abol-
ishes klefhas and past sarhnskdras has led commentators to ask a
further question (VB, BG) about the state and status of karma in
the yogi who has reached this far. As the texts (such as Vishnu-
purana V1.7.35 and BhG IV.37) state, the fire of yoga burns away
all karmas, and yoga abolishes all accumulated sin (papa). There
are many levels at which the strength of karmas is reduced. There
are many expiatory observances of prayer, ritual and right acts
that reduce the power of existing karmas and their sarhskaras by
adding to the karmashaya, the internal domain of karma, the force
of these thoughts and acts. But this does not free one from the
totality of karma, because that which has been planted must bear
fruit, and the inclination towards involvement in further acts still
remains. Thus, diluting past accumulations of evil sarnskaras by
the addition of fresh and benevolent acts 1s not in the same category
as burning them by the power of yoga, that 1s, samadhi.

The statements about yoga burning the karmas apply only to
the extent that yoga eliminates those evil accumulations which
impede the realization of true knowledge. When knowledge has
arisen, all karmas and their sarhskaras are abolished except the
prarabdha sarmskaras, the sum total gathered from past lives which
had initially determined the yogi’s birth in the given species, life
span in that particular life, and pleasures and pains (such as phy-
sical illness) that ensue in that lifetime. Pradrabdha samsk@ras thus
keep the momentum going for the yogi’s continued existence in
the present life. But there is no additional fresh accumulation of
worldly sarhskaras (VB, BG).

There is, however, a great difference between cultivating the
SOTRA 1.50 423
sarnskaras of samprajfidta and the awakening of final wisdom. The
samadhi-sarhskdras reduce the pain-causing power of the vyutthdna-
sarnskaras, but one still needs to say “Enough!” to this wisdom.
The desire for siddhis has yet to be conquered. The trap of desiring
to become a videha or prakrti-laya still has to be avoided. When
even these sarhnskaras vanish with the mind-field’s dissolution into
its cause, only then and not before will the sarhskara of ignorance
(avidya) be overcome as the dharma-megha samadhi ensues. When
all these sarhskaras are vanquished, then the cycle of the fruition of
karma in reincarnation ceases. The single knowledge, beyond this
process, which leads to liberation is the one beyond discriminating
wisdom (viveka-khy4@ti). Of that higher stage the next sitra will
speak (VB, NB, NBB, BG).

Another question may be raised: It is known throughout the
Yoga-sitras’ teaching that sarhskaras give power to the mind to
become active so that vrttis are produced; even though the sarh-
skaras of samadhi subdue the worldly sarnskaras, do not the sam-
adhi-sarnskaras produce their own kind of activity in the mind and
enhance its continuation as an involver (pra-varttaka)? Would not
this then produce further afflictions (k/eshas)? The answer is that
the vrttis and sarnskaras of samadhi are unafflicted ones (a-klishta),
therefore they produce no more afflictions. Furthermore, prakrti,
including its evolute the mind, has only two purposes:

«to present experiences (bhoga) to purusha, and

+ to aid him in attaining liberation (moksha)

At the perfection of samprajfiata samadhi and attainment o& viveka-
khydati the mind has fulfilled its purpose and can proceed no turther;
its adhikara, that is, its assignment, duty, and the power to carry
them out, is now exhausted. The mind is henceforth dismissed,
dissolved into equilibrium.
424. SOTRAISI
Sitral.s51  «- wearte freer adhrerarferdta: warts: |
tasyapi nirodhe sarva-nirodhan
nir-bijah samadhih
tasya: of that
api: even
nirodhe: upon control, cessation, dissolution
sarva-: (of) all
nirodhat: through nirodha, dissolution
nir-biyah: seedless
samdadhih: samadhi

When the control, cessation and dissolution (nirodha) of even

that sarhskara occurs, the nirodha of all else ensues and, thereby,

seedless (nir-bija) samadhi (is attained).
Vyasa’s Commentary

And what else happens to him?

[Satra:] When the control, cessation and dissolution (nirodha) of
even that sarhskara occurs, the nirodha of all else ensues and,
thereby, seedless (nir-bija) samadhi (is attained).

This samadhi not only opposes the samadhi-wisdom (prajfid)
but impedes even the samskaras produced by samadhi-wisdom.
Wherefore? Because the sarnskara produced by control (nirodha)
counteracts (badh) the sarhskara generated by samadhi.

The existence of samskaras created by the mind-field in the state
of nirodha (nirodha-chitta) 1s inferred on the basis of the experience
of the sequences of time (that elapse) during the state of the stability
of nirodha. The mind-field dissolves into its own causal nature
(prakysti), which (ever) remains in that inactive condition. It does
so together with those sarnskadras which have been produced by the
samadhi that constitutes worldly involvement (vyutthana)* and
42 Here vyutthana means samprayfidta samadhi, which 1s a worldly involvement in contrast
to a-samprajfidta, which 1s the topic of this sitra
SOTRAI51 425
cessation (mirodha). Thus, those sarhskdras are opponents of the
empowerment (adhikdra) of the mind-field, not causes of its (con-
tinued) maintenance (sthiti).

Since that mind-field whose empowerment (adhikara) has been
terminated withdraws (vi-ni-vrt) together with the sarnskdras that
are conducive to isolation, upon its thus turning off (ni-vrt), the
spiritual self (purusha) is established in his own self-nature (sva-
rapa) and is therefore called pure, one alone in isolation (kevala),
and free or liberated (mukta).

Here in Patafijali’s Sankhya-pravachana, and in Vydasa’s
Commentary, ends the first, the chapter on samadhi, within
the Science and Discipline of Yoga.

Discussion

It has been explained that the purpose of creating the sarnskaras

of samadhi-wisdom in samprajfiata is to eliminate the mind-field’s
empowerment (adhikdGra) to provide experience of the material
world (bhoga) to purusha (VM). However, this accumulated wisdom
from samprajfidta 1s not sufficient to free one from reincarnation
(VB).43 How can a mind-field filled with and perpetuating the
sarnskaras of samadhi-wisdom reach seedless samadhi (RY)? To
answer this question, the siitra now states the result of asamprajfiata.
The sarhskaras of samprajfata still maintain the mind-field’s other
assignment, which is to lead one to isolation (kaivalya). This assign-
ment, too, must be fulfilled so that the final termination of this
adhikara may occur (VM). VB says that at the lower levels of
asamprajfiata each succeeding level brings under control and dis-
solves the realization of the preceding one, at the same time attenu-
ating their sarnskaras. Only with the final asamprajfidta does the
total elimination of the lower wisdoms, the realizations that occur
at lower samprajfidtas, occur. Since Patafiyali and Vyasa, however,
do not divide asamprajfidta into these levels, VB’s statement 1s
more appropriately applicable to the differentiation into levels of
43 NB, NBB, and BG for the most part repeat VB on this stra, and BM echocs VM
Where any have an original opinion, it 1s indicated
426 SUTRAISI
samprajfata. As one progresses in samprajfidta, the wisdom-vrtti
at each level is dissolved into its own cause; as each vrtti arises
frofif a sarnskdra, the yogi observes “not this, not this” (neti, neti),
and thus denying them any worth and continuing to pursue reality,
he finally reaches the seedless, asamprajfiata, samadhi (BR, AD).
This view is more in harmony with what has been discussed in
Sutra 1.17 and echoes the teaching of the Upanishads (e.g., Brha-
daranyaka Upanishad 11.3.6; 111.9.26; 1V.2.4; 1V.4.22; IV.5.15).
Asamprajfidta not only eliminates the lower wisdoms of sam-
prajfhata but also overcomes their sarnskaras. This is the transcen-
dent dispassion (para-vairdgya) explained in Siitra 1.16, and is
synonymous with nirodha (VM). The question arises (VM): Granted
that the realization arising from such dispassion may counteract
the samprajfiata-wisdoms which are a form of ideation (vijfdna);
but how can it also overcome these sarnskdras, since they are not
in the category of ideation? Would they not have to remain the
way the memory of a dream object remains during wakeful expe-
rience? Vyasa says (VM) that while nirodha itself eliminates the
wisdom of samprajfiata, the sarnskaras of the nirodha counteract
the sarhskdras of that wisdom. Again, it is not that a single realiza-
tion of asamprajfidta accomplishes all this, but rather that when
continuous and uninterrupted practice, observed for a long time
and with due respect (see Siitra 1.14), is constantly strengthened, it
causes an unbroken flow of asamprajfdta, and these final results
accrue.

Some commentators, however, have asked, How can we know
that there exist samskaras of nirodha? There can be no direct
perception of it to serve as proof, since such proof is a vrtti and
this nirodha is the elimination of all vrttis. Nor can such a non-
vrtti leave a memory. Being above the chain of causation, its exis-
tence capnot be inferred by seeing some effect. How can one estab-
lish the proof of such a nonentity and of any possible sarnskd4ras
being created by it (VM, VB)? Vyasa answers that the transcendent
dispassion grows in stages. When the yogi comes out of asampra-
jfidta he observes the time that has elapsed and thereby infers that
nirodha has indeed occurred. (VM) It is the accumulated force of
SOTRA 151 427
such frequent mirodhas that creates an imprint (samskara), till it
grows to the utmost possible degree; if this were not so, the growth
in intensity and length of asamprajfiata would not occur. Thus one
infers that both nirodha and its sarnskaras do occur.

The argument is constructed slightly differently by HA: How
vrttis produce sarhskaras is obvious. That sathskdras in turn pro-
duce vrttis is also known. They do so by first generating pratyayas,
cognitions, presented to the mind. As sarhsk4dras arise to the sur-
face, a cognition (pratyaya) is formed and presented to the mind-
field, just as vrttis introduced externally present cognitions (prat-
yayas) to the mind-field, creating further sarnskaras. Sarhskdras
have only one function, and that is to generate pratyayas. When
such pratyayas arise no more, it may be assumed either that the
sarhskaras were not formed or that they have been exhausted or,
finally, that nirodha has occurred. However, the question remains
as to the nature of the sarnskdras of nirodha. Since nirodha, not
being a vrtti, cannot produce a cognition (pratyaya), how can a
nirodha-sarmskara form? The answer is that the flow of pratyayas
exists before nirodha and continues after it. The break in that flow
is recognized by the mind, and this recognition constitutes the
nirodha-sathskara. As these breaks occur more frequently and be-
come prolonged, the tendency to nirodha grows. Again, if nirodha
formed no sarmskaras at all, how would its growth, which is clearly
noticed, occur? Finally the flow of pratyayas totally ceases and
samadhi becomes permanent (HA). Activity alone constitutes a
reason for the continuity of the mind. That reason having been
abolished, the mind is dissolved and purusha dwells in his own
nature.

A further objection is suggested by VM and VB: It is well that
the sarnskdras of the samadhi-wisdom are eliminated; but, then,
how may the samskaras of nirodha be overpowered? Or do they
remain? But if so, the mind-field thus keeps its empowerment to
act. For could not these sarnskadras again be revived into activity
through the will of a yogi or of iShvara, in the same way that a
seed which looks burnt sometimes sprouts? This question is resolved
by a better understanding of Vydsa’s position (VM, VB): Up to the
428 SOTRAIS51

mastery of samprajfata, the word vyutthana served as an antonym
to samadhi and denoted worldly involvement of the mind. In con-
trast to asamprajfhata now, samprajniata also is vyutthana, a lower-
level awareness. The innermost part (antar-anga) of yoga is asam-
prajfata, in comparison to which samprajfidta is an exterior part
(bahir-anga) (SS). What for an ordinary person is opening the eyes
from samprajfidta into the world, for a yogi is coming down into
samprajfiata from asamprajfiata. Those samskaras of sampra-
jfiata which are conducive to isolation (kaivalya) have helped the
mind-field to fulfil its final assignments. Now, when the sarhskdras
of nirodha form, they do not produce further vrttis, thus rendering
the mind inactive. Having fulfilled its assignment and having no
further purpose to accomplish, the mind-field now dissolves into
its cause (RY). As to the case of videhas and prakrti-layas, let it
not be said that the mind’s empowerment continues because of
nirodha-samskaras; these yogis, not having reached asamprajfata,
do not have any nirodha-sathskaras. The power (adhikdra) of their
chittas continues because of the propensities (v@sands) produced
by the afflictions (kK/eshas).

An argument is presented by NB and BG: Knowledge gained in
samprajfiata burns all the past karmas except prarabdha.** Prarab-
dha is spent and exhausted as it comes to fruition in the form of
karma-produced pains and pleasures. Thus, through samprajfiata-
wisdvm all other karmas are exhausted and the prarabdha takes
care of itself and eventually becomes exhausted. Naturally liberation
(moksha) will follow. Why, then, is there need for asamprajfata?
BG says that asamprajfata only hastens the liberation so that the
yogi does not have to wait for the prarabdha to be exhausted.
NBB, hcewever, has a better answer: The sarnskaras produced by
sSamprajndta are sarnskaras of a vrtti from the exterior world. Until
these samnskaras are somehow burnt, there can be no final nirodha
and consequently no liberation. Asamprajfata alone is capable of
burning the prajfia-sarnskaras and is thus absolutely essential for
liberation. In fact, propensities (vasands) of prarabdha cannot find
44 See Sitra 1.1 (p 90) for an explanation of prarabdha
SUTRA ISI 429
a substratum when the very karmdashaya, the domain and realm of
karmas and sarhskaras, has been purified or burnt and the mind-
field itself has been dissolved. That being the case, even prarabdha
may not come to fruition and is burnt out because its coefficients
(saha-kGrin) have been eliminated.

There being no objects of concentration (@lambanas) in asam-
prajfiata (in contradistinction to samprajfiata), it is called seedless
(nir-bija) samadhi. Then one no longer rises from samadhi. This
must not be misconstrued to mean that the yogi remains physically
sitting in meditation; rather, it means that his awareness remains
pure. This state is free of those seeds, such as sarnskdras, that
produce sorrows (VB); it is also free of the sarnskaras of sam-
prajfidta-wisdom, which otherwise might bind the yogi again (NBB).
All these seeds being absent, this samadhi is called seedless (nir-
bia). Asamprajfidta 1s also called the “great sleep” (mahda-nidr@) of
the mind-field (NBB, BG).

It is not that purusha had become sullied and is now pure
(Shuddha), but rather that pains, etc. are no longer attributed to it.
It is not that it had become involved and is now isolated (kevala),
but rather that it cannot be considered to be involved. It is not that
it was bound and has now been liberated (mukta), but rather that
the bondages of buddhi can no longer be said to have been trans-
ferred to it. Hence, says Vyasa:

The spiritual self (purugha) 1s established in his own self-nature

(sva-ripa) and is therefore called pure, one alone in isolation

(kevala), and free or liberated (mukta).

In other words, upon the attainment of mir-bija samadhi the mind-
field can no longer arise into vyutthdna, and so it vanishes; then
the consciousness-potentia or the consciousness-force (chiti-Shakti),
which is absolutely eternal (ka@fastha-nitya), infinite and pure,
dwells in her own glory, without obstruction and forever, and this
is very beautiful (SS).

This chapter (VM) has stated:
430 SUTRA 151
euddesha: the name and title (Sitra 1)
enirdesha: the definition (Sitras 2-4) (and, in that context, all the
following:)
«the definition of vrtti (Sitras 5-11)
the methods for accomplishing yoga (Stitras 12-16, 20-24)
othe divisions or classifications of yoga (Sitras 17-19, 41-51)
This may be expanded (BR) as follows:
«stating the commencement of yoga (Sitra 1)
«the definition of yoga (Siitras 2-4)
eexplanation of the words chitta-vrtti and nirodha (Sitras 5-11)
«the two means, abhydsa and vairagya, and their definition (Si-
tras 12-16)
ethe primary (asamprajfiata) and secondary (samprajfidta) yogas
(Siitras 17-19)
«briefly, the methods (updyas) of yoga (Sitras 20-22)
«an easy method (ishvara-pranidhdana)
and the relevant explanation
and statement of its results (Siitras 23-29)
«(in the context of the results of ishvara-pranidhana)
the nine obstacles (vikshepas)
and their correlates (Sitras 30-32)
«the methods for overcoming the obstacles
and their correlates (Siitras 32-40)
«(as these obtacles are overcome)
further explanations of samadhis
and their accomplishments (samdpattis)—
first the seeded (sa-bija)
and then the seedless (nir-bija) samadhi (Sitras 41-51)
e e
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Patafijali, Yoga-siitras

ewith Yoga-pradipika by Baladeva Mishra. Edited by Dhundhiraja
Shastri. Varanasi: Chowkhamba, 1931.

«with the commentaries Rdja-marttanda by Bhojaraja, Pradipika by
Bhavaganesha, Vrtt: by Nagoji Bhatta, Mani-prabha by Ramananda
Yati, Pada-chandriké by Ananta-deva Pandit, and Yoga-sudhakara by
Sadashivendra Sarasvati. Edited by Dhundhiraja Shastri. Varanasi:
Chowkhamba, 1930.

with the commentaries Yoga-siddhdnta-chandrika and Sitrartha-bodh-
ini by Narayana Tirtha. Edited by Ratna Gopala Bhatta. Varanasi:
Chowkhamba, 1911.

«with the commentary Bhashya-vivarana of Shankara-bhagavat-pada.
Edited with an introduction by Polakam Sri Rama Sastri and S. R.
Krishnamurthi Sastri. Madras Government Oriental Manuscripts Li-
brary Series, no. 94. Madras, 1952.

ewith the commentaries Tattva-vaisharadi of Vachaspati Mishra and
Yoga-varttika of Vijfiana-bhikshu. Edited by Narayana Mishra. Vara-
nasi: Chowkhamb, 1971.

with the commentaries Tattva-vaishdradi of Vachaspati Mishra edited
by Rajaram Bodas and Vtti (Brhati) of Nagoji Bhatta edited by
Vasudev Shastri Abhyankar. Bombay Sanskrit and Prakrit Series, no.
46. Bombay: Government Central Press, 1917.

431
432 BIBLIOGRAPHY
«with the scholium of Vy4sa and the commentaries of Tattva-vaisha-
radi, Patafijala-rahasya, Yoga-varttika and Bhasvati of Vachaspati
Mishra, Raghavananda Sarasvati, Vijfiana-bhikshu, and Hariharananda
Aranya. Edited by Gosviami Damodara Shistri. Varanasi: Chowkhamba,
1935.

Bhagavata-purana. Gorakhpur, India: Gita Press, 1968.

Brhad-yogi-yajfiavalkya-smrti. Edited and translated into Hindi by Swami
Kuvalayananda and Pandit Raghunatha Shastri Kokaje. Lonavla, India:
Kaivalyadhama, 1951.

Dikshita, Rama-bhadra. “Shad-darshana-sidd hanta-sangraha.” Sarasvati-
bhavan Library, Tanjore.

Krishna-vallabhacharya. Kirana. Edited by Shveta-vaikuntha Shastri and
Narayana Sharana Shastri. Banaras, 1939.

Madhava. Sarva-darshana-sangraha. Edited by Uma Shankar Sharma.
Varanasi: Chowkhamba, 1964.

Mahabharata, with Nilakantha’s Commentary. Pune: Chitrashala Press,
1968.

Markandeya-purana. Edited by Shriram Sharma Acharya. Bareli, India:
published by the editor, 1978.

Udasina, Balarama. Commentary on the Yoga-siitras. Edited by K. B. R.
Sinha. Bankipore, 1867, 1897.

Upanishad-brahma-yogin. Bhagavad-gitartha-prakashika [a Sanskrit com-
mentary on the Bhagavad-gita]. Edited by the pandits of the Adyar
Library. Adyar, India: Adyar Library, 1941

Vijfiana-bhikshu. Yoga-sdra-sangraha. Edited by Swami: Sanatana Deva
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1956.

Vishnu-purana. Gorakhpur, India: Gita Press, 1932.

Other primary texts consulted and cited such as the Upanishads, Puranas

and Bhagavad-gitd are not included in this bibhography. Well-known

editions of these texts are readily available to scholars. Numerous transla-
tions of the Yoga-siitras in several Indian languages have been reviewed
but are not useful to the average reader. A detailed bibliography of

primary and secondary sources on Patafijali is to be found on pp. 58-65

in Karl Potter’s Bibliography of Indian Philosophies, vol 1 of The Ency-

clopedia of Indian Philosophies, citing 126 titles. It does not include some
of the titles consulted by us.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 433
Translations of the Yoga-siitras of Pataiijali

Aranya, Swami Hariharananda. Yoga Philosophy of Patafijali. Calcutta:
University of Calcutta, 1977.

Ballantyne, James Robert. The Aphorisms of the Yoga Philosophy of
Patanjali, with illustrative extracts from the Commentary by Bhoja
Raja. Allahabad: Presbyterian Mission Press, 1852-53. :

Bangali Baba. Patanjala Yoga Sutra. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1976.

Boissenain, J. W. Yoga-Soetra’s door Patanjali: Leerspreuken der Eenheids-
streving. Haarlem, Netherlands: J. W. Boissenain and Co., 1918.

Dvivedi, Manilal Nabhubhai, ed. and trans. The Yoga-Siitras of Patafijali.
Adyar, India: Theosophical Publishing House, 1934. .

Feuerstein, Georg. The Yoga-Siitra of Patafijali: A New Translation and
Commentary. Folkestone, England: Dawson, 1979.

Isbert, Otto Albrecht. Raya Joga, der kénigliche Weg der Selbstmeisterung
in Westlicher Sicht und Praxis. Gelnhausen, West Germany: Verlags*
Union Bundingen-Haingriindau, 1955.

Johnston, Charles. The Yoga Sutras of Patafijali. London: John M. Wat-
kins, 1964.

Judge, William Q. The Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali. Los Angeles: United
Lodge of Theosophists, 1920.

Leggett, Trevor. Sartkara on the Yoga-siitra-s: The Vivarana sub-commen-
tary to Vyasa-bhasya on the Yoga-siitra-s of Patafijali. Vol. 1, Samadhi;
Vol. 2, Means. London. Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1981, 1983.

Mangoldt, Ursula von. So Spricht das Yoga-Sutra des Patanjali. Munich:
O W. Barth, 1957. r

Mitra, Rajendralala. Yoga Aphorisms of Patafijali, with the Commentary
of Bhoja Raja. Bibliotheca Indica Series, no. 93. Calcutta: Asiatic
Society of Bengal, 1881-83.

Prabhavananda, Swami, and Christopher Isherwood. How to Know God:
The Yoga Aphorisms of Pataryali. London: Allen and Unwin, 1953.

Rama Prasada, trans. The Yoga-siitras of Patafijali with the Commentary
of Vyasa and the Gloss of Vachaspati Mishra. Vol. 4 of The Sacred
Books of the Hindus, Translated by Vartous Sanskrit Scholars. Edited
by Major B. D. Basu. 1912. Reprint. New York: AMS Press, 1974.

Shree Purohit, Swami. Aphorisms of Yoga by Bhagawan Shree Patanjalt.
London: Faber and Faber, 1938.
434. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Stephen, Daniel R., trans. Patanjali for Western Readers. London: Theo-
sophical Publishing House, 1919.

Taimni, I. K. The Science of Yoga. Madras, India, and Wheaton, IIL:
Theosophical Publishing House, 1961.

Tirtha, Swami Omananda. Patafijala-yoga-pradipa (in Hindi). Gorakhpur,
India: Gita Press, 1960.

Woods, James Haughton, trans. The Yoga System of Patafiyal. Harvard
Oriental Series, vol. 17. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1914.
Reprint. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1927.

Woods, James Haughton. “The Yoga Sitras of Patafijali as Illustrated by
the Commentary entitled ‘The Jewel’s Lustre,’ or Maniprabha.” Journal
ofthe American Oriental Society 34 (1915): 1-114.

Translations of Other Source Material

Madhavacharya. The Sarva-darsana samgraha, or, Review of the Dif-
FSerent Systems of Hindu Philosophy. Translated by Edward Byles
Cowell and Archibald Edward Gough. London: Trubner and Co.,
1882.

Mahadeva Sastni, Alladi, ed. Yoga Upanishads, with the Commentary of
Sri Brahma- Yogin. Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1968

Vijfiana-bhikshu. Yoga-Sara-Sangraha. Translated by Ganganatha Jha.
Rev. ed. Theosophical Publishing House Oriental Series, no. 10. Mad-
ras, India‘ Theosophical Publishing House, 1933.

Secondary and Reference Literature
Apte, V.S Sanskrit-English Dictionary. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1970
Arya, Usharbudh. God Honesdale, Pa.. Himalayan International Institute,
1979
----— Mantra and Meditation. Honesdale, Pa . Himalayan International
Institute, 1983.

Bahm, Archie J. Yoga: Unton with the Ultimate. New York: Unger, 1967.

Bedekar, V. M. “The Dhydnayoga in the Mahabharata (XII.188).” Munshi
Indological Feltcitation Volume, Bharatiya Vidya 20:115-25, 21:1960-61.

Catalina, Francis Victor A Study of the Self Concept of Sankhya- Yoga
Philosophy. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1968
BIBLIOGRAPHY 435

Dani, Ahmad Hasan. Alberuni’s Indica. Islamabad, Pakistan: University
of Islamabad Press, 1973.

Dasgupta, Surendra Nath. A History of Indian Philosophy. Vols. | and
2. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1963, 1965.

——-. A Study of Patafijali. Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 1920.

——. Yoga as Philosophy and Religion. Calcutta: University of Calcutta,
1924.

——. Yoga Philosophy in Relation to Other Systems of Indian Thought.
Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 1930.

Deussen, Paul. Allgemeine Geschichte der Philosophie. Vol. 1, pt. 3.
Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1920.

Edgerton, Franklin. “The Meaning of Saénkhya and Yoga.” American
Journal of Philosophy 45 (1924): 1-46.

Eliade, Mircea. Yoga: Immortality and Freedom. Translated by Willard
R. Trask. 2d ed. Bollingen Series, no. 61. Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1969.

——.. Patafijali and Yoga. Translated by Charles L. Markmann. New
York: Schocken Books, 1975.

Feuerstein, Georg. The Essence of Yoga: A Contribution to the Psycho-
history of Indian Civilization. London: Rider, 1974.

———. The Philosophy of Classical Yoga. New York: St. Martin’s Press,
1980; Manchester’ Manchester University Press, 1980.

———. “Some notes on the final stages of yoga according to Patajfijali.”
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan (Bombay: Rajendra Prasad College of Mass
Communication and Media) 37 (1971): I-12.

———.. The Yoga-Siitra of Patafyali: An Exercise in the Methodology of
Textual Analysis. New Delhi: Arnold-Heinemann, 1979.

Feuerstein, Georg, and Jeanine Miller. Yoga and Beyond: Essays in Indian
Philosophy. New York: Schocken Books, 1972.

Frauwallner, Erich. Geschichte der indischen Philosophie. Vol 1. Salzburg:
O. Muller, 1953.

Garbe, Richard von. Samkhya und Yoga. Strassburg: K. J. Trubner,
1894,

Gonda, Jan. Die Religionen Indiens. Vol 1. Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer
Verlag, 1960.

Hauer, Jakob Wilhelm. “Das IV Buch des Yogasiitra.” Studia Indo-
Iranica: Ehrengabe fur Wilhelm Geiger, edited by Walther Wust. Leipzig
Otto Harrassowitz, 1931.
436 BIBLIOGRAPHY

———. Der Yoga, ein indischer Weg zum Selbst. Stuttgart: W. Kohl-
hammer, 1958.

———. Die Anfange der Yogapraxis im Alten Indien. Stuttgart: W. Kohl-
hammer, 1922.

Hopkins, E. Washburn. “Yoga Technique in the Great Epic.” American
Oriental Society Journal 22 (1901): 333-79.

Hultzsch, E. “SAmkhya und Yoga im Sigupalavadha.” Aus Indiens Kultur:
Festgabe fur Richard von Garbe, edited by Julius von Negelein. Erlan-
gen: Palm and Enke, 1927.

Isbert, Otto Albrecht. Raja-Joga, der kénigliche Weg der Selbstmeisterung
in Westlicher Sicht und Praxis. Gelnhausen, West Germany: Verlags-
Union Bindinger-Haingriindau, 1955.

Jacob, George Adolphus. A Concordance to the Principal Upanishads
and Bhagavadgita. Bombay: Government Central Book Depot, 1891.
Jacobi, Hermann. “Uber das Urspriinghche Yoga System.” Sitzungs-
berichte der Preusischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Berlin: Aka-

demie Verlag, 1929.

Janatek, Adolf. “The Meaning of Pratyaya in Patafijali’s Yoga-Sitras.”
Archiv Orientalni 25 (1957): 201-60

——. “The Methodological Principle in Yoga according to Patafiyali’s
Yoga-Sitras.” Archiv Orientalni 19 (1951): 514-67.

——.. “Two Texts of Patafijali and a Statistical Comparison of their
Vocabularies.” Archiv Orientalni 26 (1958): 88-101

———.. “The ‘Voluntaristic’ Type of Yoga in Patafijali’s Yoga-Sitras.”
Archiv Ortentalni 22 (1954): 69-87.

Johnston, Charles. The Yoga-Sitras of Patavyalt. The Book of the Spiri-
tual Man. New York: Quarterly Book Dept., 1912.

Joshi, K S. “On the Meaning of Yoga.” Philosophy East and West 15,
no. | (1965): 53-64

Karnatak, Vimla. A Critical Study of the Patanjala-Yoga-Sitra in the
Light of its Commentators (in Hindi). Banaras Hindu University San-
skrit Series, no 10. Varanasi: Chowkhamba, 1974.

| Koelman, Gaspar M. Patafyala Yoga: From Related Ego to Absolute
Self. Poona, India: Papal Athenaeum, 1970.

Larson, Gerald James. Classical Samkhya: An Interpretation of its His-
tory and Meaning. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1969.

LaVallee Poussin, Louis de. “Le Bouddhisme et le Yoga de Patanjali ”
Milanges Chinois et Bouddhiques 5 (1937): 223-42.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 437

Miller, M. The Six Systems of Indian Philosophy. London: Longmans,
1916.

Oberhammer, Gerhard. “Gott, Urbild der Emanzipierten Existenz im
Yoga des Pataiijali.” Zeitschrift fiir Katholische Theologie (Vienna)
1964: 197-207.

——. Strukturen Yogischer Meditation. Veréffentlichungen der Kom-
mission fur Sprachen und Sidasiens, Heft 13. Vienna: Verlag der Os-
terreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1977.

Panikkar, Raimundo. The Vedic Experience: Mantra-manjari. Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1977.

Pensa, Corrado. “On the Purification Concept in Indian Tradition, with
Special Regard to Yoga.” East and West n.s. 19 (1969): 194-228.

Pines, Shlomo, and Tuvia Gelblum. “AI-Biriini’s Arabic Version of Patafi-
jali’s Yogasttra.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African
Studies 29 (1966): 302-25 and 40 (1977): 522-49.

Potter, Karl H., comp. Bibliography of Indian Philosophies. Rev. ed.
Vol. | of The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies. American Institute
of Indian Studies. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979.

Rama, Swami Choosing a Path. Honesdale, Pa.: Himalayan Interna-
tional Institute, 1982.

———.. Inspired Thoughts of Swami Rama. Honesdale, Pa.: Himalayan
International Institute, 1983.

Rama, Swami, Rudolph Ballentine, M.D., and Swami Ajaya. Yoga and
Psychotherapy. Honesdale, Pa.: Himalayan International Institute,
1976.

Sahay, Mahajot. “Patafijala-Yogasitras and the Vyasa-Bhasya: An Ex-
amination.” Vishveshvaranand Indological Journal 2 (1964): 254-60.

Shankaracharya. Bhdshya on Shvetashvatara Upanishad. \n Ten Princi-
pal Upanishads with Sankarabhdsya. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1964, 1978.

Shukla, Nalini. Patafijala-yoga-siitra ka vivechanatmak evarh tulandtmak
adhyayan (A critical and comparative study of Patafijala-yoga-sitra;
in Hindi). Kanpur: Shakti-yogashram and Nalini Shukla, 1975.

Takagi, S. Shingen. “On ‘Kriyd-yoga’ in the Yoga Sutra.” Journal of
Indian and Buddhist Studies 15, no. | (1966): 451 ff.

Weldon, Ellwood Austin “The Samkhya Term, Linga.” American Jour-
nal of Philology 31 (1910): 445-59.

——— “The Samkhya Teachings in the Maitri Upanishad ” American
Journal of Philology 35 (1914). 32-51.
438 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Winternitz, Moriz. Geschichte die indischen Litteratur. 3 vols. Leipzig:
Amelang, 1905-22.

Zigmund-Cerbu, Anton. “The Sadangayoga.” History of Religions 3 (1963):
128-34.

Zimmer, Heinrich Robert. Kunstform und Yoga in indischen Kultbild.
1926. Reprint. New York: Garland, 1981.
Glossary /Index
The Glossary/ Index lists in English alphabetical order the most
significant Sanskrit and occasional Pali words used in the text.
Information given with each word includes a brief definition agd
selected locations in which the word appears. No effort has been
made to cite every place in which a given word may be found.
a-bhava Negation; a negative; absence; non-being; a state of non-being;
non-production; non-appearance; absence of vrtzs of waking and
dream states; absence of all other vrttis mentioned in the Yoga-sitras.
176, 178, 179, 249, 254, 320
abhava-pratyaya Causal principle; cognition principle of negation. 178
abhava-yoga Yoga of absence or negation of all transient feelings and
states. 120
abheda-bhrama_ Error or illusion of non-distinction. 384
abhi-buddhi_ An activity of intelligence, e.g., “I must do this.” 43
abhi-dheya Significatum (the signified). 315
abhi-dhyana Directing one’s thought, will or concentration towards
(God). 277
abhijata Pure-born. 371
abhimana An activity of intelligence, e.g., “/ do this”; assumption of a
false identity attributed to the spiritual self. 43, 127
abhimata Agreeable, desired, or favourite object of choice; any object
of one’s choice. 335, 365
439
440 GLOSSARY/INDEX

abhinivesha Fear of death; “May I not cease to be”; “I fear my death,
the death of this body that I am.” Abhinivesha is a kleSha whose real
name is blind nocturnal (andha-tdmisra, q.v.) 44, 162, 169, 170

abhi-vyakti Manifestation. 120

abhoga (The mind-field’s gross) expansion; the awakening of a wisdom
(prajfia) in which a realization of the true nature of an object of
concentration has occurred. 218, 226

abhyantara Internal. 98

abhyasa Practice; the endeavour (yatna) to make the mind stable; the
endeavour with regard to, for the purpose of, stilling the mind. (See
also abhyasa’s correlate, vairagya.) 106, 193, 195-97, 198, 248, 336, 342

abhyasa-patava Expert or skillful practice. 146

abhyudaya Worldly success in the present life. 36

acharya A teacher who has himself experienced self-realization; a
scholar-savant and commentator. 6, 27, 110, 214

adara_ Respect. 415

a-dharma Unrighteousness; vice. 85, 93, 285

adhi-atman The spiritual self. 412

adhibhautika Caused by other beings such as beasts of prey, enemies,
etc. One of the three kinds of pain (duhkha). 47, 329, 330

adhi-bhita Pertaining to the attributes of the five gross elements and
other beings. 42, 43

adhidaivika Caused by deities, planetary influences and other natural
forces such as heat, cold and conscious powers of the subtler worlds.
One of the three kinds of pain (duhkha) 47, 329, 330

adhi-deva (adhidaiva) Pertaining to celestial and subtle worlds,
conscious powers of nature, angelic beings, planetary deities, etc. 42,
43

adhigama Attainment; realization 320

adhikadra Purpose, topic; beginning of subject matter; prerogative;
empowerment; teacher’s authority, a student’s qualification, and the
statement of a commencement, assignment; assignment or duty and
the power to carry it out. 19, 66-67, 141, 419, 423, 425, 428

adhikara-sitra A sutra that states the purpose or subject matter of a
text or a portion thereof. 21, 61

adhikarin Qualified; one who 1s qualified for a study. 280

adhimatra Extreme; ultimate. 258, 275
GLOSSARY/INDEX 441

adhishthatr Ruling power. 306

adhishthatrtva Command over the dominion (one of the ten
immutables in the Lord). 301

adhyaropa Superimposition. 127

adhyasa Superimposition. 311, 384

adhyatma Spiritual; pertaining to dtrnan; development of oneself
inward, towards one’s spiritual nature and the mental and physical
faculties controlled by the self. 42, 411, 412

adhyatma-prasada Spiritual clarity. 412

adhyatma-vidya Pursuit of proficiency, knowledge, of a spiritual
science. 200

adhyatmika Within oneself; internal to oneself. One of the three kinds
of pain (duhkha). It is twofold: mental, such as desire, passion,
jealousy, greed, fear, depression; and physical, such as caused by the
imbalance of humours. 47, 329, 330

adhyaya Study in the formal sense of study of the Vedas, requiring
recitation, adhering to strict principles of enunciation and
accentuation, memorizing each word accurately, etc. 318

a-dvaita Non-dual. 67n

advaita-yoga Yoga of non-duality. 91

@gama_ Revealed authority (one of the valid proofs [pramdnas]);
textual, scriptural or inspired-revealed authority; authoritative textual
tradition; knowledge derived from an inspired text, one’s tradition or a
realized teacher, (one’s accepted) tradition and scriptural authority. A
matter seen or inferred by an accomplished person is transferred in the
form of words into another person: the vrtti(s) from that word,
together with its matter and meaning as the object, is the listener’s
acquisition (agama). Literally, “that which comes.” 143, 149, 161, 214,
266, 295, 390

a@gamin One who is versed in the gama, the textual authority as well as
the tradition of the yoga lineage. 312 .

aham |. 237

ahamkara Ego; ego process; the identifying principle by which the
composite sentience (asmita) begins to identify itself as such-and-such
a being, e g., “I am this body.” 94, 225, 245

aishvarya Sovereignty and spiritual freedom; lordship (one of the ten
immutables in the Lord); worldly success, power, luxury and affluence.
An abstract noun formed from ighvara (the Lord). 93, 101, 205, 206,
301
442 GLOSSARY/INDEX

a-jfiana Ignorance, e.g., false perception and sleep. 93, 105

akanksha Aim; intent. 115, 137

akasha Space. 356, 369, 370

a-khyati Non-apprehension; non-perception. 166-67

a-klishta Not painful; not afflicted; pure; not imbued with kleshas. A
proof (pramana) or a vrtti leading one to rise beyond attraction or
aversion is a-klishta. 135, 138

a-kuShala Not well; il1. 282, 285

alabdha-bhimikatva Failing (despite observances) to reach the plateau
of confirmed achievement of a state of consciousness (failing to gain a
ground). 324, 327-28

a-lakshya Unworthy of a detailed definition. 83

alam! Enough! 213

a@lambana_Resorting to; supported by; leaning on; dependent on; having
as a base; object of concentration or meditation as support. A
supportive factor (for samprajfidta) may be any of the following: the
twenty-three evolutes of matter; primary matter (prakrti); the
individual self; an aspect or incarnation of God. (See also dhyeya.)
120, 178, 220, 361, 372, 374, 429

Glasya Laziness; languor; sloth; (because of) heaviness of body owing to
fat, phlegmatic tendencies or heaviness of a tamasic mind. 324, 327

alata-chakra Circle of fire (as) when a torch is whirled rapidly. 137

alaya-vijfidna Universal idea. (See also vijfidna-vdda.) 395

a-linga Unmanifest; without mark; non-quantitative; without
characteristics; unmanifest, unmodified prakyti in the state of complete
equilibrium of the three gumas (sattva, rajas and tamas). 35, 225, 404,
407

a-linga-paryavasina Extending up to unmodified matter (prakrti). 404

a-lupta-Shakti Power, potentia (Shakti) that never suffers a loss or a
reduction. 301

a-marsha Intolerance. 342

anadhi-bodha _ Beginningless wisdom (enlightenment). 301

an-aiShvarya Loss of sovereignty. (See also aishvarya.) 93

an-dkula Free of disturbance. 269

@nanda_ Ecstasy; rapture. 218

fnandamaya kosha_ Sheath of bliss (in which the self 1s mistaken to be
happy, unhappy, suffering pain or enjoying pleasure). 245
GLOSSARY/INDEX 443

ananda-anugata <A samadhi accompanied by ecstasy, rapture (dnanda).
(See also sG@nanda.) 224

anantarya Transition in a sequence. 66

ananta-Shakti Infinite power; potentia (Shakti). 301

anapana-sati Pali for mindfulness of inhalation and exhalation—the
paramount Buddhist meditation practice; breath awareness entailing
slow, controlled exhalation (prachchhardana) and slow, controlled
inhalation (vidharana); measured breathing. 268, 348

an-atman Non-self. 396

anatta Pali for an-drman (non-self). 396

an-avachchheda Absence of delimitation, break or division. 305

an-avasthitatva Instability, inability to maintain a ground or level;
having gained a higher ground, one falls from it. 324, 328

andha-tamisra Blind nocturnal (the real name of abhinivesha, q.v.);
blind night (period of dissolution tn a single cycle). 168, 169

anga Limb; part; support; means; complement. 37, 75, 76, 85, 96, 200,
301

angam-ejayatva Unsteadiness or shaking of the body; movement and
twitching of the limbs in meditation. 329, 331

angangi-bhava A convention of Indian logic whereby when a statement
1s made concerning a complete entity (angin, one who owns avigas or
parts), each one of its parts (avigas) is already presumed to be included.
75

angin A whole constituted of parts (angas). 75, 85, 96

anima Power to become minute (a siddhi). 168

afijana That which anoints. 397

annamaya kosha_ Sheath made of food (1n which the mortal personality
passing through various physical states is mistakenly identified as the
self) 245, 246

antah Ending in; extending up to. 368

antah-karana Inner mental instrument; the eleventh sense; psyche; the
fourfold inner sense or instrument consisting of manas, buddhi,
ahamkara and chitta. 94-95, 352

antah-prajfia Inwardly conscious (as with the sleep state) This term is
used in verses 4 and 7 of the Mandakya Upanishad. 180

antah-safijfia Inwardly conscious (as with a sleeping person). 180

antar-anga Innermost part. 428
444. GLOSSARY/INDEX

antariya Obstacle; impediment; obstruction. (See also chitta-vikshepa.)
320, 324

antaraya-abhava Absence of obstacle, impediment or obstruction. 320

antar-yamin Indweller; the dweller within; pervading within all things
and beings. 300, 306

anu Prefix meaning “within, subsequent, following” (as anu-Shdsana,
“within” a tradition). 62, 71, 72

anu Atom; minute. 368, 407

anubandha_ Binding reason. 60

anu-bhita That which has been experienced. 185, 186

anu-gama Accompaniment. 218

anugata Accompanied by. 224

anu-graha Grace; grace given; benefit conferred; benevolence; kindness.
295

anugraha-sarga (Fivefold) compassionate creation, which includes the
five subtle elements (tan-mdtrds) as well as appearances of divine,
incarnate sages. 46

anumana_ Inference (a valid proof [pramm4ana]); a rational, logical,
inferential process leading to a conclusion. Anumdna (primarily)
determines the general rather than the specific since its object is the
inferable conforming to the homogeneous and excluding the non-
homogeneous. 143, 149, 150, 159, 214, 266, 387, 390, 414, 416

anumana-prajiia Wisdom gained from inference or logical processes.
416

anu-pashya_ To look after; to care for. 413

anupati (anu-patin) Following; dependent upon. 171

anu-Shasana Instruction; discipline; teaching that follows within (anu) a
tradition. Anu-Shasana connotes (a) that the yogic discipline 1s
imparted only after a disciple has demonstrated purity of observances
in self-discipline and has prepared the ground for the seed to be sown,
and (5) that what is being taught has been taught before, that it 1s
within an existing tradition with no claim that anything new has been
created. 62, 69, 71-73

unuShravika Heard of 1n a tradition, scripture or in any other
authoritative source. 169, 205

anu-smyti Repeated awareness. 268

anuss~f: Pah for anu-smyti. cultivating repeated awareness (as with
anapana-sati). 268
GLOSSARY/INDEX 445

anu-viddha Intertwined. 381

anu-vytti Implicit succession, i.e., a word in one sitra is implied in one
or more subsequent sitras until it is no longer needed. 178-79,
315 n. 30

anu-vyavasdya The awareness buddhi has that it cognizes, apprehends,
or experiences. 189

anvaya Induction (as in logic). 152

anya Another; the other; different. 248, 258, 416, 419

anya-sarhskara-pratibandhin That which blocks, counters or prevents
other impressions. 419

anyatha-khyati Misapprehension. 166

anya-vishaya Different in scope. 416

apana See prana(s).

a-para Not transcending. 209

a-pari-mrshta Unsmeared. 282

apara pratyaksha_ A lower category of direct perception as opposed to
transcendental, direct perception (para pratyaksha). 386

apara-vairagya The lower dispassion (which is an attempt at dispassion
for all attraction whatsoever), which falls within samprajfata samadhi
only. Apara-vairadgya relates to worldly objects, unlike para-vairdgya
(q.v.), which relates to the gunas and to knowledge. It is divided into
four steps or stages: yatamdana (initial effort), vyatireka
(ascertainment), ekendriya (pertaining to the single sense, mind, only),
and vaghikara (control and mastery). 209-11

aparipamin Immutable. 126

apatatah Incidentally. 145

apavarga Liberation; final liberation; deliverance; the Supreme Good.
145, 351, 353

apta An accomplished person; one who has attained; a noble teacher;
authority; one who combines (a) tattva-darshana—realization of
reality; (b) ka@runya—motivation to remove the suffering of others
(compassion); and (c) karana-padfava—strength of senses and body and
expertise in the use thereof. 160

pti Attainment. 160

a-punya Vice; nonvirtue; nonvirtuousness; nonmeritoriousness. 340

apyayita Filled and expanded. 214

a@rambha-vada See a-sat-kdrya-vdada.
446 GLOSSARY/INDEX

artha A matter; meaning; reality; an actual substance; actual state or
object that is realized; a purpose; aim; object of pursuit; object
denoted, signified or meant; object of concentration. 62, 84, 153, 173,
187, 315, 333, 380, 392

artha-atman Self-nature of a real object; that which has a real self-
nature. (See also @tnan.) 388, 396

artha-bhavana Cultivating or absorbing the real meaning (in
meditation). 315

artha-kriya-karin Efficacious, i.e., anything producing certain results by
which the observer infers its characteristics. It is anointed (a/fijana) by
the attributes of its causes; it represents that cause which has revealed
it, which has given it the appearance of an effect. 397

artha-matra Only the object meant. 387

artha-mfatra-nirbhisa That in which only the object meant shines forth.
387

artha-Shinya Devoid of interests; without interest or purpose; without a
substance. 248n, 255

asamprajiiata samadhi Acognitive samadhi; nirodha-samadhi (the
samadhi of total control and final cessation of vrttis); nir-bija samadhi
(seedless samadhi requiring no Glambanas), wherein samsk4ras can no
longer produce kleshas, karmas and their fruition; the great sleep
(mahda-nidra) of the mind-field; the state in which the self dwells in the
self. 63, 146-47, 186, 220, 248, 251

a-sampramoshah Non-theft; not being stolen; not being lost. (From the
verb root mush ‘to steal’.) 185, 186

Gsannah Near; very close, impending; imminent. 271, 277n

d@sannatara Closer; imminent. 277, 280

a-sat-ka@rya-vada A doctrine of the Nyaya-Vaisheshika schools, viz.:
Qualities of effects do not exist in their causes, but fresh qualities are
produced and their prior absence (prdg-abha@va) in the cause is evident.
We know they were not there when we see them appear in fresh
objects. (This view is also known as a@rambha-vada.) 395

a-sevita Pursued, thoroughly served; maintained in assiduous and
complete observance; assiduously undertaken for a long time and
without interruption 202

a-Shakti (Twenty-eight kinds of) incapacity of mind and intelligence. 44

aShaya Propensity; accumulation; domain; storehouse; the domain
wherein something lies dormant; that which hes dormant; that which
sleeps. (From d + Shi.) 188, 282, 286-87, 419-21

ashram (ashrama) Hermitage, retreat; center for religious or spiritual
study and practice. 7, 71-72
GLOSSARY/INDEX 447

ashvattha A tree; metaphor for the universe, “with its roots above,
branches below.” 299

@sita Let one establish the posture, sitting (in yoga). 318

asmi_ I am. 408

asmita I-am-ness (synonymous with svatva ([possession]); liriga-mdtra;
composite sentience. Asmitd is produced when /iriga-mdtra (mahat or
buddhi) receives and reflects consciousness from purusha, thus
creating the composite (reflected spirit plus matter, i.e., reflected
purusha plus prakrti) sentience. It is asmitd and not purusha that is the
agent of apprehension (grahitr), the one who apprehends. Asmitd is a
klesha whose real name is stupor (moha). 38-39, 44, 128, 139, 162, 167,
168-69, 218, 225, 226, 239, 244, 245, 246, 247, 357, 408

asmita-anugata A samddhi accompanied by J-am-ness (asmitd). (See
also samprajfiata samadhi.) 224

asmité-matra Only the awareness of “I am”; I-am-ness alone. One of the
two vishokd samapattis, the manifestation of I-am-ness. 355, 356, 357

a-sphuta Indistinct. 181

astika-buddhi An attitude of affirmation that there is a God, karma and
life after death. 266

astya Jealousy; intolerance; malice; the inability to acknowledge others’
good qualities, 1.e., being petty or faultfinding. 341, 342, 343

Asuri_ A disciple of Kapila and second in line among the founders of
Sankhya. 41, 129, 296, 304

a-tad-ripa-pratishtha Established in a nature or form not of that
(object). 163

a-tattva Opposite to a reality or to the self-nature of any object or
entity; non-that-ness. 421

atha Now, at an auspicious moment of transition; expressing: transition
in a sequence (dnantarya), a teacher’s authority, a student’s fulfilment
of a qualification, and/or the statement of commencement. The word
atha (together with OM) came from the Creator’s throat in the
beginning of the creation; hence both words are auspicious. Atha 1s a
particle (avyaya) word, i.e., invariant in all syntactical situations and
capable of expressing states that are themselves immutable. 62, 63-71

atideSha-siitra A sitra that presents an analogy. 20

atikranta-bhavaniya Yogis on the last of four levels of yogic attainment,
those who have transcended all processes and no longer have anything
remaining to be cultivated. 78

atindriya Supersensual; (knowledge) gained by means other than the
senses, such as knowledge of objects beyond the range of the senses,
€.g., too small or too large. 99, 296
448 GLOSSARY/INDEX

ativahika Sharira The subtle body as the vehicle of migration in which
sarhskaras continue to be maintained. 261

Gtma-bhita Having become a self; having a self-nature. Atma-bhiita
expresses the self-nature of any object or entity (not to be confused
with the spiritual self). 397

atma-jfiina Self-knowledge. 214

Stma-kalpena Standing on its own, i.e., the mind dwelling in itself, by
itself; identifying with the self (4tmnan); imagining itself to be the self.
145-46

atman (/) The self; spiritual self; oneself. (See also Brahman.) 29, 121,
154, 245, 412 (2) The self-nature, essence, real self-nature, of any
object or entity. 388, 396, 397, 412 The student must be alert to the
two definitions of aman so as not to confuse the two in a given
context.

fitma-sambodha_ Self-awareness; self-realization (one of the ten
immutables in the Lord). 301

atmiya Belonging to (the self); akin to (a kin to); belonging to or related
to (some realm or other). 168, 186

Gtyantika Total and permanent. 119, 146

audasinya Sense of neutrality; the middle way. 344

aupadhika A condition by reason of proximity and not an innate
quality; a temporary condition of appearance. 90, 118

autsukya Interest. 210

ava-dharana A determinant process (whereby general, shared properties
are eliminated by the mind so as to enable it to focus on the specific,
e g., cows—»the brown cow); to maintain continuously in the mind.
150, 228

a-vairagya Lack of dispassion. 93

ava-sthana Stability; settling; remaining; being in a given state. 114

avasthé-parinama Mutations of condition (like a candle flame), of
which there are two kinds: internal (@bhyantara) and external (bahya).
98

ava-sthita Constant; stable. Ava-sthita derives from ava + stha ‘to go
through a process or condition’ and therefore connotes something
(e.g., the mind) which remains constant or stable while passing
through many conditions. 339

a-vastu. Insubstantial; not a real object. 127

avatara Incarnation of the deity 301
GLOSSARY/INDFX 449

avayava Separable; part; component. 388

avayavin A whole; having parts or components. 388

aveSha Process or state of being possessed or taken over. 392

a-vibhaga Not being divided or distinguished; non-division; non-
distinction; non-separation. 380, 382

a-vidvan Ignorant. 292

avidya Ignorance; nescience; mistaking the self to be non-self. Avidyd is
a klesha whose real name is darkness (tamas). It is both its own cause
and the cause of the other kleshas. 44, 85, 139, 162, 167, 168, 170, 292

a-vikalpita Non-fictitious; non-imaginary; unalterable; not alternating. «
394, 415

a-vinad-bhava Sine qua non (without which not); something absolutely
essential. 298

a-virati Failing to turn away from the world and the senses; non-
abstention; craving for sense objects. (Antonym: uparati.) 324 327

a-vi-sarh-vadin That which is consistent and cannot be challenged. 151

a-visheshas Non-specific, intermediate links between mahat and the
final sixteen products of prakrti, the visheshas. Thus the a-v-Sheshas
are the causes of the visheshas, viz.: five gross elements, five active
senses, five cognitive senses, and the mind. There are six a-visheshas,
consisting of the five subtle elements (tan-mdtrds) and the ego
(ahamkara). 35, 225, 247

a-viShishta Undistinguished (as when the mind sees itself as
undistinguished from purusha). 156

a-viveka Absence of correct knowledge; indiscrimination. 167, 193

a-vividisha The tendency that blocks desire for knowledge; absence of
the desire to know. 43

a-vyakta | Unmanifest prakrt: and its evolutes. 168

avyaya Particle. 64

avyayata Immutability. 300

fiyama Expansion. 348

fyur-veda Medical science.. The Ayur-veda is the Veda treating of the
science of medicine. 4

ayus Life span. 286

baddha_ Bound, 1.e., not free. 377

badh Impede; counteract. 419, 424

bahir-anga Exterior part. 428
450 GLOSSARY/INDEX

bahya External. 98

bandha_ Bondage. 46, 289-90

bhakti Devotion, of which a specific form taught in the Yoga-sitras is
practising the presence of God. 277, 280

bhakti-vigshesha A specific form of devotion. 277, 279

bhakti-yoga The yoga of devotion and surrender to a personal God. 91

bhashya A disciple’s detailed commentary on a master’s sutras,
including background and experiential information presenting
connections among sitras, amplification, etc., to render the sitras
comprehensible. 6

bhava State; being; worldly continuity; delimited material existence
subject to rebirth. 176, 258, 259-60

bhavana, bhavana Cultivated concentration; cultivating and absorbing
a meaning; an internal process of impressing an object of
concentration (bhavya) repeatedly onto the mind. 220, 228, 242, 279- .
80, 315, 316, 340, 392

bhavanatva Being a process. 392

bhava-pratyaya A samadhi whose causal cognition develops into the
continuity of worldly being (samsara) at (re)birth. This samadhi
accrues to videhas and prakrti-layas and 1s the experience of bodiless
shining gods (videha devas). 256-60

bhavya Object of concentration. 220

bheda A division or category 60, 94

bhoga Experience; enjoyment; the material world as the object of
experience; experience presented to the spiritual self, pleasant or
painful experience during one’s life span as the result of karma (a
vipadka, qv.) 145, 282, 286, 288, 420, 425

bhoktr Experiencer; one who partakes of experience (bhoga) 288

bhranti-darshana Wrong views; confusion of philosophies (See also
viparyvaya.) 324, 327

bhimi Ground, level or plateau at which the yog: arrives, then leaves
behind on the way to the highest samadhi Four different levels of
attainment (bhdmiis) are associated with the yogi en route to karvalya.
77-78, 82

bhimik& Step; stage (See also bhiam:.) 209

bhata Gross element There are five bhatas: space, air, fire, water,
earth (See also rattvas ) 34, 42

bhata-artha Reality, a real object; true nature 421
GLOSSARY/INDEX 451
bhatadi Beings with tamasic ego who perform acts of stupefaction:
sadnumana (performing good acts of stupefaction), and niranumana

(performing evil acts of stupefaction). 44

bhita-sikshma Subtleties or subtle aspects of the elements. Not to be
confused with sikshma-bhita. 376, 401, 417

bija Seed; /inga; sign; indicator; root; root of all knowledge. 295, 299

bodha_ Spiritual awakening; a teaching; direction given. (From the verb

root budh ‘to awaken, to get to know’.) 87

bodhi A Buddha’s enlightenment. (From the verb root budh ‘to
awaken, to get to know’.) 87

Brahma The Progenitor; the Creator who takes the universe as His
body. Brahma is a masculine word, not to be confused with the neuter

word Brahman. (See also Hiranya-garbha.) 29, 70, 301

brahmacharya Celibacy; maintaining control over sexual passion. 202,

203

Brahman’ The One Principle; the Single Transcendental Reality which is

Existence (sat), Consciousness (chit) and Bliss (@nanda); the Self of all

that is; the Expansive One. (From the verb root brh ‘to expand, to be

expansive’.) 28, 300

brahmana Philosopher; child of Brahman; the highest Hindu caste. 72

brahma-vihara Frolicking in Brahman. (See also parikarma(n).) 342

brahma-yoga The yoga of Brahman. 91

buddhi_ The faculty of intelligence, intuitive wisdom, intellection and
discrimination in a sentient being; sativa of the mind-field. Buddhi's

twofold faculty of discrimination is: .

1. The outward-looking face of buddhi (towards the conscious mind),
called the faculty of intelligence. The twofold faculty of intelligence
includes (a) the outward face (intellect) and (4) the inward face
(intuitive wisdom).

2 The inward-looking face of buddhi (towards the spiritual self, 1.e.,
purusha), called the faculty of intuition. .

An inherent relationship existing between self and matter is an eternal

attribute of prakrti, the cause of mahat and buddhi. 33, 34, 77, 81, 94,

133, 163, 356, 403

buddhi-bodha-atma Purusha as ordinarily identified with the
apprehensions of buddhi. 116

budh To awaken; to get to know. 87

chaitanya Consciousness (an attribute of the spiritual self alone) 130,
172

chakras Centers of kundalini energies within the composite person. I1
452 GLOSSARY/INDEX

chafichalya Restiveness (by means of which rajas produces pain). 358

charya-yoga The yoga of denominational ritual devotions. 91

cheshta-moha_ Confusion of the physical posture, gait, movement or
effort as though one’s limbs are not under one’s own observation or
moved by one’s own will. 192

chetana Consciousness. (See also chaitanya.) 320, 321, 322

chetayitr Source and cause of awareness, i.e., purusha. 288

chid-akaSha (The inner) space of consciousness. 369, 370

chit, chiti Consciousness; pure consciousness; consciousness of the
spiritual self; seer; purusha. (See also chiti-Shakti.) 80, 94, 106, 109,
114, 120, 151, 200

chiti-Shakti Consciousness-power (consciousness-potentia),
consciousness principle; pure consciousness; energy; the spiritual self;
absolute and eternal power called consciousness. 94, 106, 108-10, 113,
114, 115, 120, 155

chitta (J) The mind-field whose universal attribute is sama@dhi. (2) The
entire mind-field (antah-karana), including manas—active mind;
buddhi—intellect and intuitive wisdom; ahamkdara—ego; and chitta—
the mind-field per se, including the universal unconscious (as well as
manas, buddhi and ahamka4ra). The five levels or grounds of chitta
(mind-field) are: disturbed (kshipta), somnolent or stupefied (midha);
distracted (vikshipta); one-pointed (ekagra); and controlled
(nuruddha). Only the latter two are considered to be states of yoga. 62,
76, 93, 94-95, 96, 98, 106, 110, 114, 124

chitta-nadi River of the mind-field. 196

chitta-parikarmas Ways of adorning, refining, purifying and preparing
the mind (through diligent practice). 367, 368

chitta-prasidana Purifying the mind and making it pleasant. 341, 342,
346

chitta-sattva Sattva of the mind-field (buddhi), illumination, sattva, that
has taken the form of the mind-field. 93, 100-1

chitta-vikshepa Distraction, impediment, obstacle or disturbance of the
mind-field. There are nine such chitta-vikshepas ( YS 1.30), together
with their five correlates or companions ( YS I 31). (See also vikshepa.)
324

chitta-vytti-nirodha Control and dissolution of the vrttis of the mind-
field 93

daitya Demonic being. 104

dakshina bandha (dakshinika bandha) Bondage by which worldly
people remain involved with desires and hope for liberation through
GLOSSARY/INDEX 453
ritual practices. Included are renunciates who become dependent on
the offerings of basic necessities received from householders. 46,

290

dama_ Restraint (one of the six treasures of Vedanta). 67

danava Demonic being. 104

darshana_ Derived from the verb root drSh ‘to see’, darshana is a many-
faceted word, including: perception; school of philosophy;
philosophical view; philosophy of life; vision; insight; realization; a
yogi’s realization; seeing or gaining insight into that realization which
occurs in samadhi. Darshana is the Sanskrit word for philosophy
because all philosophy, together with its logical processes, derives only
from such (samddhi) realization. 130, 160, 193, 195, 212, 214, 387,
393-94

daur-manasya_ Frustration; anguish; despair; bad mood; ill-mindedness;
emotional disturbance; instability. Literally, “‘bad-mindedness” (from
dur [bad] and manas [mind]). (Antonym: saumanasya.) 329, 331

devas Celestial beings; shining ones; celestial, shining ones; angelic
beings without physical bodies. 104, 207, 261

dhairya Steadfastness and patience. 200

dhamma _ Pali for conditions (dharma). 268

dharana Concentration; mental attention. 348, 355, 356

dharma Virtue; righteousness; attribute; characteristic; quality;
condition. 85, 93, 101, 175, 285, 287, 303, 388, 397

dharma-megha samadhi The samadhi of the raincloud of virtue and of
the knowledge of the nature of all things (in which the mind dwells in
itself by itself, then identifies with the spiritual self); the final state of
samprajhidta samadhi; the higher stage of the asmitd-accompanied
samadhi and the initial stage of the acognitive asamprajfiata samadhi.
Dharma-megha is endless; the yogi perceives worldly objects as
unmentionables (having abandoned them) and dwells only in his own
essential nature. 94, 107, 113, 145, 147, 216-17, 253

dhatu A constituent of the body, e.g , blood, flesh, bones, the three
humours (air, bile, phlegm), etc. 326

dhrti Fortitude; resolution of mind, speech and action (one of the ten
immutables in the Lord). 43, 301

dhyana Meditation. 303, 345

dhyana-abhyasa The practice of meditation. 415

dhyana-abhyasa-rasa Enjoyment of the flavour and essence of the
practice of meditation. 415

dhyana-yoga The yoga of meditation. 92
454 GLOSSARY/{INDEX

dhyeya Object of concentration; object of meditation. (See also
alambana.) 373, 392, 412

dhyeya-artha The reality of the object of concentration. 392

dik (dish) Dimension. 36

dosha Fault; blemish; defect. 211

drashtr Seer; chiti-Shakti (consciousness-potentia). 114

dravya Substance 36

drdha-bhimi Firm of ground. 202

drk-Shakti Power of the seer; seer-potentia. 120, 322

drShi Sight; seeing. 120

drshi-Shakti Seeing-potentia; seeing power. 120

drshta Seen; tangible; perceived with the physical senses; insight
(realization within); realized or seen in the state of samadhi. 160, 169,
205

drshtanta Exemplification (a term in the Indian five-member syllogism).
159

drshya Something that 1s perceptible; a perceptible. 131-32

duhkha Pain; an attribute of the rayas guna, pain produced by vrttis
taking the form of objects experienced, any kind of pain, grief, sorrow,
suffering; pain of desires; those suffering; first of the fourfold noble
truths of the Buddhist doctrine; the first concern of Sankhya-yoga
philosophy, which identifies three kinds of suffering: @dhyatmika,
adhibhautika, Gdhidaivika. 139, 184, 329-31, 340

dvesha_ Aversion; hatred. Dvesha 1s a kleSha whose real name 1s
nocturnal (t@musra) 44, 137, 162, 167, 169, 170, 343

dyotayati Illumuinates. 84

eka One; only one, e.g., @iman, the self. 240

eka-Stmika samyvit The perception of a unified self 240

eka-buddhi-upa-krama_ Introduced by a unitary intelligence (buddhi).
396

ekagra One-pointed; concentrated One of the five grounds or states of
the mind-field. 62, 78, 84, 157, 242, 333

ekagra bhimi One-pointed ground. 373

ekagrata One-pointedness, 200, 252

ekagrata-dhara Stream of one-pointedness or concentration. 412, 421
GLOSSARY/INDEX 455
eka-tanata Being an unbroken stream. 214
ekatara koti One (or the other) of two categories at a time. 369
eka-tattva The One Reality (God), one principle, factor or reality; real
element: a single matter. 333, 336
ekendriya Pertaining to the single sense, the mind, alone. (See also
ekendriva dispassion.) 209, 210
ekendriya dispassion The third stage on the path to apara-vairdgya. The
mental attraction 1s reduced while one yet continues to experience the
objects with one’s external senses. Effort is directed towards attaining
dispassion towards mental attractions (since mind is the only
remaining barrier to vashikara). 210
gandha-pravrtti Manifestation of smell (such as apprehension of a
celestial fragrance) from concentration on the point between the two
nostrils where the base of the nose joins the upper lip. 350
gati Gait; goal; locomotion; endeavour. Gari conveys a sense of
movement and revelation. (From the verb root gam ‘to know, to
move, to reach, to go, to grasp’.) 307, 416
Gaudapada Guru of Shankaracharya’s guru, Govinda. Gaudapada
authored the Mandiikya-kdrikds, the most complete ancient statement
on the Vedanta philosophy. 67n, 180
gaurava Cumbersomeness. 129
ghora_ Ferocity attribute (a major personality disposition, which buddhi
assumes in association with rajas) 118, 126
grahana Instruments of grasping (mind and senses); instrument; process
and fact of experience; process and means of apprehension with which
one grasps, experiences or cognizes. 188, 225, 226, 234, 235, 247, 277,
290, 296, 371, 372, 374, 375, 376-77
grahana-samapatti Having instruments of grasping as the field of
coalescence and command. 247, 378
grahitr That which grasps (I-am-ness, the reflection of the pure self in
the buddhi), the one who apprehends; the agent of apprehension; the
one who grasps or experiences or cognizes 225, 226, 235, 247, 277,
371, 372, 374, 375, 377-78
grahitr purushas Spiritual selves that appear to be agents of action and
to be grasping the objects of experience. 377
grahitr-samapatti Having the apprehender as the field of coalescence or
command 241, 247, 378
grahya Object of apprehension; objects grasped, experienced or
cognized, 1.e., gross and subtle elements, etc. 188, 225, 234, 235, 247,
277, 371, 374, 375, 376
456 GLOSSARY/INDEX

grahya-samapatti Having gra@hyas as the field of coalescence or
command. 228, 247, 378

grahya-uparakta Associated with and coloured by the object of an
apprehension. 187-88

gunas The three attributes of unmanifest prakrti, which are in
equilibrium before the creation of evolutes and whose disequilibrium
constitutes the process of creation. All material entities (evolutes)
including the mind are composites of the three gunas: purity and
illumination (sattva); activity (rajas); and inertia (tamas). They are the
seats of pleasure, pain and delusion. 29, 30, 31, 42, 77, 93, 126, 212

guna-vaitrshnya The state of being free of all craving for the gunas (free
of worldly desires). 212

harhsa-mantra The word soham used with exhalation and inhalation to
enter into meditation. 366

hatha-yoga_ Physical yoga within the context of interior, subtle forces.
92

hetu Cause; purpose; effect; means (a term in the Indian five-member
syllogism). 139, 159, 419

Hiranya-garbha The Golden Womb; the first guru; the universal being;
the first wise one; the teaching spirit of the universe; the original
teacher of yoga; Prajapati (the Progenitor); Brahma. The first human
being 1s said to have been an incarnation of the Golden Womb. All
revelation 1s of the grace that flows from Hiranya-garbha. 39, 69-71,
105, 281, 289, 297

hlada_ Rapture. 235

ichchha Desire, will. 43, 273

ida The subtle energy channel (nd@qi) that flows on the left side of
sushumind and controls the parasympathetic branch of the autonomic
nervous system. 65

indriyas (/) The eleven senses. mind, five cognitive senses, and five
active senses. 42 (2) In Buddhism the word indriyas refers to the “five
strengths.” 268

indriya-Shakti (Inner) power of the senses 377

irshya Jealousy 342

iShitva | Physical, mental and vocal lordship unimpeded by any (a
siddhi) 169

iShvara Parama-atman. [shvara is forever and always free. Wherever
the lordship (aiShvarya) reaches its extremity, that 1s God (ishvara). He
GLOSSARY/INDEX 457

is neither prakrti nor what is referred to as purusha; hence ighvara is a
special purusha. He is the special Conscious Being (purusha-vishesha).
IShvara is that special purusha not smeared by afflictions, actions and
their fruitions, and by the domains of their accumulated propensities.
Ishvara also has temporal meanings such as: a lord; a lordship;
commanding presence, etc. (From the verb root ish ‘to have power or
control over; to be able to [create, control, direct]; to govern; to
impart grace’.) 101, 154, 277-304

iShvara-pranidhana Practising the presence of God; to dwell near and
close to God; to place oneself down (in all humility and egolessness) in
the proximity of God; to surrender and place oneself at the disposal of
God. Such devotion should be mental, vocal and physical. In the
context of YS 1.23 ishvara-pranidhana means that the grace of God,
when invoked by a true devotee, leads to samadhi (as qualified in the
commentary). This approach to samadhi is referred to as the easy
path. 277-81, 309, 315-23, 335, 430

jada Unconscious; dull. 151

jada-samadhi Samddhi of the unconscious. 262

jadata Dullness; stupefaction. 181

jadatva Non-sentience. 383

japa Concentration on a mantra. Chant, recitation, contemplation, etc.,
when faith and devotion are present, are all parts of the complete japa
process. The word japa has essentially been left untranslated in the
text for want of an appropriate English rendering. 242, 315

japa A kind of red flower. 127

jati. Species (in which one is reborn). 286

jijfiadsa Desire for knowledge; desire to know. 61, 68

jijfiasu) One who has desire for knowledge; a seeker. 61, 103

jiva Individual soul. Sankhya holds that purushas becomes jivas, souls,
when they assume a connection with prakrti. 29, 302

jiva-atman The individual self as soul of a body. 279

jivan-mukta One who is liberated while yet in a body, still maintaining
the body. Pra/aya (dissolution) cannot occur in a sivan-mukta even
though the mind comes very close to pralaya. 86, 146

jivan-mukti State of liberation while yet incarnate. 146

jfia To know. 219

jfiana Knowledge; awareness; observation; ideation, wisdom that arises
458 GLOSSARY/INDEX

jfiana (continued)
from yoga (one of the ten immutables in the Lord). 68, 87-88, 101, 186,
301, 303, 361, 384

jiiana-prasada Clarity of knowledge at its purest. 214

jfiana-yoga Yoga of knowledge. Vedanta is regarded as the path of
knowledge (jfidna), and Vedantic texts teach that liberation occurs
through knowledge. 87, 92

jfieya Object of knowledge. 361

jyotishmati Luminous; full of light (of sattva), lucid; luminous one. 355

kaivalin One who attains kaivalva, q.v. 289

kaivalya Isolation; self-realization; final isolation of the self from
matter, when the self dwells in its own nature; absoluteness; liberation,
synonymous with asamprajfidta samadhi, which follows dharma-
megha samadhi. 39, 60, 73, 79, 114, 119, 146, 194, 216

kala Time. 36, 305

kalpa_ A cycle of creation and dissolution. 169, 303

kalyana All that is beautiful, benevolent, propitious, desirable; a noble
way; way of beatitude; moksha, liberation 194

kama Desire. 141

ka&mavasayita Whatever one says or intends with the mind comes true
(whereas in the case of others it conflicts and 1s not fulfilled). A siddhi.
169

Kapila It is said that Kapila was the first rshi, to whom the knowledge
of Sankhya-yoga was given He 1s thus the legendary founder of the
Sankhya-yoga system of philosophy. Pafichashikha stated that
Hiranya-garbha created a great mind into which he incarnated,
becoming the sage Kapila. The lineage thus began with Hiranya-
garbha—>Kapila—Asuri—> Pafichashikha. 4, 39, 41, 297, 303, 304

karana_ Instrument; instrumentation, sense. There are eleven Aaranas in
the Sankhya system five active senses, five cognitive senses, and mind
(antah-harana), the inner instrument The compound expression sva-
Aarana-samvedva means “experienced directly with one’s own
Instrumentation.” Thus collectively the Aaranas may be looked upon
as the instrumentation for the entire concentration process 326,
352-53

karana-patava Expertise in the use of strength of senses and body (one
of the qualifications of a realized teacher) 160

karana Sharira Causal body; /inga Sharira. 246
GLOSSARY/INDEX 459

karma (karman) Action. 102, 135, 136, 140, 141, 144, 282-87, 334, 338

karma-devas Shining ones bound to action, as the videhas and prakrti-
layas. 263

karmaShaya_ Repository or domain of karmas; storehouse of samskdras;
that subtle domain of the mind-field where are left all impressions of
the objective world without and vytris from the mental world within;
karmic force. (See also Ghaya.) 91, 110, 135, 136, 140, 287, 338, 419,
429

karma-yoga Yoga of action. 92

kartavyata An activity of intelligence: indulgence of the cognitive senses
into that which needs to be done or acted upon. 43

kartr Doer; agent of an action. 176

karuna (karunya) Compassion; motivation to eradicate the suffering of
others (one of the qualifications of a realized teacher). Fully
developed, A@runya wards off dvesha (aversion). 160, 340, 343

karya An act. 420

kashaya_ Despoiler; emotion such as attraction (rdga). 204, 209

kauShala_ Skillfulness 286

kaushthya vayu Visceral air. The practice of controlled exhalation of
visceral air subsumes diaphragmatic breathing, which is the
fundamental breathing method in all yoga practice (See also dna@pana-
satt.) 348

kaya Body 268

kevala| One who has attained kaiva/ya (isolation of self from matter);
one alone; isolated; exclusive; pure; joyful, absolute. 117, 282n, 320,
429

kevalin§ Absolute entity. Keva/in is a Jaina term and should not be
contused with the Yuga-sitras’ term katvalin, meaning one who attains
Aaivalya. 289

khyati Discriminating wisdom, discernment; knowledge; clarity of
wisdom (prayfta-prasada), reflective cognition, umination. 102, 122.
129-34, 141, 166, 212, 217, 420

klesha Affliction; impurity There are five k/eshas (afflictions), avidya
(ignorance), asd (1-am-ness), rdga (attraction), dvesha (aversion),
and abhinivesha (fear of death). These A/eshas not only effect vritis but
can also be the effects of vrrtis (From the verb root A/ish ‘to suffer’ )
44, 62, 83, 110, 135-41, 162, 167-70, 285

kleSha-hetuka Caused by the A/eshas; cause of the Aleshas. 139
460 GLOSSARY/INDEX

klishta Afflicted; painful; impure; imbued with k/eshas. A proof leading
one to favour an attraction (raga) is considered klishta. 135-42

kosha_ A sheath. There are five koshas: Gnandamaya kosha (sheath of
bliss), vijidnamaya kosha (sheath of knowledge), manomaya kosha
(sheath of mind), pradnamaya kosha (sheath of prdna), and annamaya
kosha (sheath of food) 245, 246

kriya Activity; process; operations of the active senses; motion;
efficacious execution; practicability. 43, 302, 388

kriya-Shakti The power of action; creativity by which the world comes
into existence and is maintained within the Law. 291

kriyd-yoga Yoga of ascetic practices. 93

kshama_ Forgiveness (one of the ten immutables in the Lord). 301

kshanika-vada A Buddhist theory of momentariness, viz.. An idea
exists for a moment only, and (rather like a kinetoscope) a stream of
such moments gives the illusion of continuity. In such a context there
need be no single, continuous chitta. 336

kshaya Reduction. 419

kshetra Field. 65

kshina-vrtti One whose vrttis have subsided. 371

kshipta Disturbed; agitated state, simple agitation of an ordinary
worldly mind, totally unsteady, dominated by rayas; always flung
about from one object to another (the waketul state of a “normal”
person in the world). One of the five grounds or states of the mind-
field 62, 78, 82-83, 100, 103-4

kshobha_ Anguish, as when a desire is frustrated. 329

kumbhaka_ The prdndyama of controlled breath retention 347

kundalini [he snake of eternity, the residue that remains after material
consciousness 1s dissolved. 59, 60

kushala Well, wellness, free of all physical, mental or situational il
condition (resulting trom one’s acts) Skillful, expert, proficient, e g ,
one who ts “expert at surgery” 1s shalva-Arivad-Aushala 282, 285-86

kitastha = [he unmoditiable, immutable, unchangeble, a statement of the
nature of Brahman 39

kafastha-nitya Eternal as an Absolute, immutable and never modified,
absolutely eternal 313, 429

laghima =I he power to become light (a siddhi) 168

lakshana_ Definition 60, 249
GLOSSARY/INDEX 461

lakshana-siitra A sdtra that defines. 96, 195, 284

lakshya The state to be aimed for; whatever is defined. 249

lakshya-yoga Yoga of practising concentration on a target. 92

laya Dissolution (of effects into their causes—of the gross into the
subtle, etc.); dissolution of the universe and its phenomena. (See also
nirodha.) 38, 95, 196, 223

laya-yoga Yoga of dissolution. 93

lila Play. 302

linga Sign; indicator; mark; bija (seed); linga body (constituted of the
mahat evolute alone). The conventional (r#dhi) meaning of /inga is a
sign or a mark. All twenty-three evolutes of prakrti are linga (with
mark). The derivative (vaugika) meaning is “that which dissolves,
vanishes, disappears.” (From the verb root /7.) (See also a-/inga.) 207-
8, 299, 406

linga-matra Merely a mark or sign with no distinguishing features; the
subtlest evolute, mahar (the universal and individual buddhi), the
barest sign of the presence of matter; mahat, the first evolute, the
faintest presence, the first sign that prakrr gives of its presence. 35,
225, 238, 406, 407

linga Sharira Causal body consisting of mahar alone; also called Adrana
Sharira. 246, 262

loka The world, that which shines; that which “looks” (people are
fokas), and that which 1s “looked at” (the worlds, locations [cognate to
locus, loci]). (From the verb root /ok, meaning [and cognate to] “to
look “) 396

loka-pratyaksha Durect perception with the senses in the ordinary
world, direct (secular) perception, worldly perception. 416, 418

madhu-bhami_ Ihe honeyed ground. The second of the four levels of
yogic attainment. 77

madhu-bhimika A yog experiencing the honeyed ground 108

madhumati Honeyed, filled with sweetness 78

madhu-pratika Where the honey of the first ground (smadhumati) has
become as though it had been only symbolic of this second level 7%

madhya Medium, as in “medium methods” (madhva-upaia) or
“medium progress” (adhyva-samvega) 271, 275

madhya-samvega I hose of medium progress 271

madhya-upaya Those of medium methods 271
462 GLOSSARY/{INDEX

maha-moha_ Great stupor (of which there are ten types) associated with
the nescience (avidyd@) of attachment (rdga). 168, 169

mahan_ Great; expansive. 357

mahan atma_ Great, expanded, or expansive self. 377

maha-nidra The great sleep of the mind-field when it 1s dissolved at
liberation. 429

mahia-pralaya Total dissolution of the universe after one thousand
cycles. 303

mahat The universal buddhi, a small spark of which is the individual
buddhi, linga-matra; the most satrvic, finest and purest product of
prakrti; the first disequilibrium of the gunas; the first evolute of
prakrti; “the great,” “the Magnum ™ An inherent relationship between
self and matter is an eternal attribute of prakrti, the cause of s1ahat
and buddhi. 32-33, 34, 35, 133, 233, 235, 236, 238

mahatmya_ Exaltation; glory; power. 173

mahat-seva Service to the great. 200

mahattva Greatness; magnitude. Contrasted with the subtlest and the
minutest, mahattva becomes the largest or the most expansive, which
is twofold: internal (asia) and external (the cosmos). 368, 369

maha-vakya Great sentence; a profound statement. There are four such
maha-vak yas (taken from the Upanishads) 1n the Vedanta philosophy,
which form the basic statements of that philosophy for contemplation
and realization 392

maha-yoga The great yoga, yoga of absence or negation of all transient
feelings and states. There are no objects of concentration as supports
(@lambanas) and there remains only the manifestation of one’s own
nature 120-21

mahima The power to become large (a siddhi). 169

maitri Amity, love, sauharda (goodheartedness, eucardia, triendship)
340, 343

mala Impurity; blemish; defilement; maculateness, taint, macula 163,
217,411

malina  Detiled, impure; unclean 179

manana Contemplating; contemplation The second of the four stages
of gaining knowledge. 91, 390, 391, 415

manas_ The active or lower mind that receives sensations and emits
reactions to them 94, 225

manasa Mind; mental 350
GLOSSARY/INDEX 463

manasa-putra Mental offspring. 304

mani Gem; crystal. 371

manomaya kosha_ The sheath of mind (wherein the process of
mentation 1s attributed to the self). 245, 246

mantra-yoga Yoga of the practice of mantras. 92

matra No other but; only; merely. 215

matra A measure. 104

matsarya Small-mindedness. 343

maya Brahman’s potency (Shaktr), with the twofold power to veil and
unveil (reveal). 28

metta Pali equivalent of the Sanskrit word maitri (amity, love,
friendship) 343

mithya-jfidna False knowledge. 162, 163

moha_ Delusion; somnolence; stupor. The attributes of the tamas guna
are of three kinds: weh@ra-moha, cheshta-moha, and vedana-moha.
Moha 1s eightfold and is associated with the nescience (avidya) of I-
am-ness (asnirda). 168, 184, 192

moksha__ Liberation, release: 1solation; total and final liberation (the
spiritual self dwelling in its own nature). (Antonym. sanisdra.) 47, 61,
91, 97, 194

mrdu_ Slow, mild, as in “mild methods” (s#7rdu-updya) or “mild
progress” (narcdu-samivega). 271, 275

myrdu-sarhvega Those of mild progress. 271

mrdu-upaya Those of mild methods. 271

miidha Stupetied or somnolent (one of the five grounds or states of the
mind-field), unable to distinguish between right or wrong acts;
dominated by the tamas guna (when midha represents the state of
sleep and other forms of stupor, such as being comatose, inebriated,
drug afflicted, or otherwise generally not alert). Miadha also means
stupefaction or somnolence as an attribute or major personality
disposition which budedAi assumes in association with tamas. 62, 78,
82-83, 104, 105, 118

mudita Joyfulness, gladness One of the brahma-viharas. 340

mukta_ Free, liberated, one having attained mohsha 283, 377, 425

mukta purushas_ Liberated ones, purushas themselves, disembodied
masters; spiritual selves, great liberated historical figures. In this latter
context the term refers not to the bodies or physical appearances of
historical personages but to the purushas themselves, the liberated
spiritual selves 377-78
464 GLOSSARY/INDEX

mukti Liberation. 146

miilika-arthas The ten fundamental tenets of Sankhya philosophy. 46

mumuksha_ Desire or determination for liberation. 61

mumukshu One who has the desire or determination for liberation. 61,
265

marti Form: image. 383

nadi(s) Subtle energy fields or channels which control movements and
configurations of sentient beings. 65n

nadi-Shodhana = Pranayama (the practice of physical breath control)
using one nostril at a time. 347

nairantarya Without interval, without interruption. 202

Narayana One of Vishnu’s names 385

nasagra_ Tip of the nose; the point between the two nostrils where the
base of the nose joins the upper lip (See also gandha-pravytti) 352

neti, neti Not this, not this. 250

ni-bandhana (ni-bandhani) [hat which binds, fastens, firmly
establishes, seals (See also sthiti-nibandhana ) 350

nididhyasana Meditating (meditation) NididAyvdsana is based on words
{ie not direct experience), hence 1s sa-vitarkAa and does not lead to
pertect realization Its also sa-vihalpa In Vedanta, however, it 19 all
higher meditation The third of the four stages of gaining knowledge
OF WO WL ALS

nidra Sleep the sleep seeeeitself that modification of mind which
causes the sleep state to ensue or to continue &2, 102n, 148, 361

nigamana  Conclusron (a termvin the Indian five-member sytlogasm) 159

migrabs Corscon  ontrol Yb

nittesbrevasd osmitualseceess the tighter goalin this and the next life.
CG vere ae terri OG

Nimitta | Purpos Preot causation efficrent cause. any causative factor
283 402

nir-alambana = Supportless without an object of concentration in
meditation 253

nir-afyana  Unanointed 121

nir-anumana = Performing evil acts of stupefaction 44

nir-atishaya | Ulumate. not exceeded (by any other), unexcelled 295
GLOSSARY/INDEX 465

nir-bhasa Manifest; shining forth; illuminating; illuminative. 185, 188,
387

nir-bija samadhi Seedless samadhi; samadhi without objects of
concentration (Glambanas); asamprajfidta samadhi; samadhi wherein
the samskdras can no longer produce kleshas, karma and their fruits.
94, 146, 242, 257, 429

nirdesha Definition. 430

nirdeSha-sitra A sitra that defines (See also /akshana-sitra.). 94

nirmana-chitta Incarnation into an individual mind (not a physical
incarnation) via Hiranya-garbha; a mind-field specially created to
serve as a vehicle of incarnation; a produced mind. 281, 288-89, 304

nirmana-kaya An incarnate form (Buddhist term for the historical,
physical body of the Incarnate One). 281

nirodha Control; dissolution; restraint or control of all vrrris of the
muind-field, dissolution of vrttis into their source in the mind-field;
kaivalya,; rendering inoperative. Characteristics of nirodha include: no
fresh impressions arise from the external world, its experiences,
relationships or memories; the state of samadhi creates its own
impressions on the soul’s mental mantle; but impressions left in the
mind-ftield from past experiences remain. Nirodha (total control of the
vrttis of the mind-field) is dependent upon both practice (abhyasa) and
dispassion (vairdgya). (See also /ava.) 38, 63, 86, 93, 95-99, 115, 120,
144, 193, 195-97, 252, 426-27

nirodha-chitta| The mind-field in the state of total control (nirodha); the
mind-field in the state of samadhi (samadhi-chitta). (Antonym:
vyurthdna-chitta.) 114n, 424

nirodha-samadhi Samadhi wherein nirodha (control) has occurred;
samadhi of total control and final cessation of vritis. 77, 145, 257

nirodha-samskaras In acognitive asamprajnata samadiu the vrttis have
ceased, only inoperative nirodha-samsharas remain as residue, and
even these “ashes” are under the yogi’s total control to maintain life
support if so desired. 87, 252, 427

niruddha Controlled, brought under control; that which has reached the
State of mirodha. One of the five grounds or states of the mind-field
62, 78, 218, 219

nir-vichara A samadhi devoid ot subtle thought, a samapati, which
includes higher stages of sa-vichara samadhi, and adnanda-
accompanied and asmutd-accompanied samadhis 231, 399-403, 40%,
409, 411, 414, 417-18, 421

nir-vikalpa Non-discursive (awareness in the form of a wet of buddhe
466 GLOSSARY/INDEX

nir-vikalpa (continued) . .
fixed on the self’s own nature [sva-rupa]); free of superimposition of
word, object and idea upon one another. Nir-vikalpa 1s synonymous
with nir-vitarka and nir-vichara-samadhis. 111, 389

nir-vitarka Without a gross thought; the higher stage of vitarka-
accompanied samadhi. 381, 387-98, 403, 409

nishkriya Inactive. 175

nishnata Immersed. 7

nitya-Ananda_ Ever-blissful. 121

nitya-buddha_ The pure self who is ever awake. 364

nityam a-lupta-Shakti Power (shakt1) that never suffers a loss or
reduction 301

nitya-mukta-svabhava One whos ever free by nature (i.e., purusha).
377

ni-vartaka Dusinvolver; terminator; inhibitor, abstainer; abolisher,
urging and prompting one away from X. (Antonym. pra-vartaka ) 138

ni-vrt Toturn off 425

niyamas__ Austerities; stability, restraint, control, the second of the eight
angas of yoga, viz. cleanliness and purity (Shaucha), contentment
(santosha), ascetic practice (tapas), selt-study (svadhvdra), and
practice of the presence of God (ishvara-pranidhdna) 145, 197

niyama-sitra A sdrra that restricts or enjoins against an act 20

nyag-bhava Becoming a subsidiary 240

nyag-bhita Subordinated 393

nyasa_ A special form of concentration on pornts of the body which are
identified with deities, syllables, stars, etc 366

Nyaya One of the classical Indian philosophical systems, dey oting its
attention primarily to the science of logic The syllogism of the Nyaya
system consists of five parts praryAd (proposition), Aer (cause),
drshtanta (exemplitication), upanava (recapitulation of cause), and
nigamana (conclusion). 153, 159

OM [he sound that is God’s name and 1s identical with Him, God
(iShvara) 1s the signified meaning of OM, a, u, ni, tollowed by the
silent half mora Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva are signified parts of OM
310, 313-14, 316, 317

padartha (pada-artha) An object, the meaning of a word (pada) as
denoted or signified by that word 388
GLOSSARY/INDEX 467

paficha-parva Having five segments. 167

Pafichashikha A disciple of Asuri and the sage third in line among the
founders of the Sankhya school. He is reputed to be the author of
Shashti-tantra. (See also Kapila.) 122, 123, 297, 303, 304

Panini Probably history’s foremost grammarian. He finalized the
system of Sanskrit grammar in four thousand sarras perhaps sometime
between the 7th and 4th centuries B.C. 73, 74

pafifia A Pali word, similar to prajfia of Vedanta, meaning “wisdom” or
“knowledge.” One of the “three jewels” (along with si/a and samadhi)
of Buddhism Buddhists regard samadhi as a step to pafifia. 88

papa Evil; evil way; evil result; evil act; sin; transgression. 195, 342, 349,
422

para Transcending; beyond; supreme, transcendent; of a higher kind;
transcendental. 209, 212, 387

para-atman The transcendental self. 200

parak See pardafich.

parama Ultimate. 368

parama-anu Munutest atom. 368, 407

parama-atman The Supreme Self; Brahman; ighvara. 99, 278, 300

parama-mahattva Ultimate greatness or magnitude. 368

paramfartha The highest good; ultimate nature; Brahman, the
Transcendental. (From parama + artha.) 143, 163-64

paramartha-satya The transcendental reality 109

paramarthika Relating to paramartha, q.v. 163

parafich (parak) Turned away from (the inward self) towards distant
objects (From para + afich ) 322

para pratyaksha Transcendental direct perception (of the yogis), which
1s the basis or seed of teaching and of the inferential process. 386, 387,
393

ParaShara_ Vydasa’s father 318

paratra’ Into another In the context of YS 1.7 paratra means that the
teacher’s cAutta-vrttis appear in the chitta-vyrttis of the student. 161

para-vairagya The higher or transcendental dispassion, final freedom
from attachments This higher dispassion relates to the gunas, to
knowledge (/fidna) and to the means thereof. (See also apara-
vairdgva.) 85, 108, 139, 213, 241

para vashikara Supreme mastery 369

paribhasha-sitra A sara that gives rules for the application of other
sutras 20
468 GLOSSARY/INDEX

parikarma(n) Purification; refinement; a refining; way or act of
adorning, polishing, preparing, purifying, training (the mind);
seasoning, giving a final protective or enhancing touch that prevents
deterioration; supportive act in any science. Cultivation of the four
parikarmas—maitri (amity), karund (compassion), muditd (gladness),
and upeksha (indifference)—enables one to stabilise the mind-field.
340, 342, 344, 351, 368-69

paripnama Temporary state; mutation; alteration; mutative mode. 80, 95,
100, 129, 265

pari-Shuddhi All-round and complete purification. 387, 391

parvan (parvas) Segment, section or joint, as of bamboo or any such
multipart, single object. 167, 216

paryavasana Extending up to; ending at; reaching its limit at; etc. 404

paryudasa Negation by omission (logically not a very strong negation).
137

pashchat-tapa Literally, “afterwards burning.” The burning within
oneself after an (evil) action; a guilt feeling: repentance 344

paurusheya Purusha-originated; purusha’s own. 156

phala The end result(s) obtained, fruit; goal, ultimate goal. 60, 155

phala-siitra A sitra that defines the end results, fruit, ultimate goal, etc.
115

pingala The subtle energy channel (#dd7) that flows on the right side of
sushumnd and controls the sympathetic branch of the autonomic
nervous system 65

pishachas The lowest kind of demonic beings; ghoul-like beings 104

prabandha Dam, dike 194

pra-bh@ To bring forth into being 394

prachchhardana Expulsion, exhalation The visceral air 1s slowly
exhaled through the nostrils with particular care, effort and method
This is the antidote to prashvdsa (See also Gndpdna-satt ) 346-48

pradhana) Unmanilest pradrm; principal matter 132

pra-dyotayati Illuminates fully 84-85

prag-abhava Prior absence 395

prag-bhara A dam or dtke (prabandha) Its derivative meanings include
bearing a weight or load tipping in favour of (as ona scale), carrying a
momentum towards, predisposed towards 194

Prajapati = [he Progenitor, which equates to Brahma (See also Hiranya-
garbha ) 70
GLOSSARY/INDEX 469

prajiia Wisdom; completely realized; realization of the true nature of
the objects of meditation; the process of the awakening of wisdom and
the wisdom itself, as in samprajfata. 219-20, 229, 264, 421-22

prajfia-jyotis Those whose light is wisdom. Yogis on the third of the
four levels of yogic attainment. Along with the madhu-bhimika, the
prajha-jyotis are yogis at the middle ground of yogic attainment. 78,
108

prajfia-prasada Clarity of wisdom. 141

prajiia-viveka Discrimination from awakening wisdom. 264, 269

prakamya Power by which all that one may wish can be fulfilled (a
siddhi). 168, 283

prakarsha Supremacy. (From pra [expressing “initiating” and
“propelling”] plus Arsh ‘to draw forth’.) 306

prakarsha-gati Supremacy which initiates and propels the process of
creation and revelation. 306-7

prakasha Light; illumination. 109, 197

prakasha-atman Having illumination as its very self-nature. 412

pra-khya !Jlumination (from sattva). 93, 102

prakrta bandha_ See prakrtika bandha.

prakrti Principal, not yet evolved, primordial matter in the state of
equilibrium of the three gunas not yet manifest as the phenomena of
the universe; a-/inga (without mark or sign); the unmanifest,
intangible, subtlest origin or tangible matter (nature); the existence
principle without consciousness (syncretic definition); the unconscious
material-energy principle (Sankhya definition). In Sankhya philosophy
there are eight origins of evolutes, collectively called prakrtis: prakrti,
huddhi (mahat), ahamkara and the five tan-mdtrdas (the five subtle
elements of sound, touch, form, flavour and smell). The three gunas
(sattva, rajas and tamas) represent prakrti's attributes, qualities,
creative potential Ina state of equilibrium prakrti is pure, unmanifest
potential. Upon disequilibrium the gunas combine in endless ways to
create manifest nature. An inherent relationship between self and
matter is an eternal attribute of prakrti. Not to be confused with
Prakrt: with a capital P, q v (See also pradhana.) 28-30, 41, 81, 97,
105, 133, 225, 299

Prakyti (when written with a capital P, as against prakrt:) Brahman’s
nature, the source of »dyd, often identical with maya. 28

prakrtika bandha Bondage by which one identifies the self with praAra
or with any of its evolutes. Prakrt-lavas, q.v., exemplity this bondage
46, 2X9
470 GLOSSARY/INDEX

prakyti-layas Prakrti-dissolved ones; those who are absorbed in prakrti
(unmanifest matter in equilibrium before creation), but have not yet
reached kaivalya. They have mastery over pure prakrti and so may
create universes, etc. They are not free of the cycles of sarmsara,
however. 207-8, 256-58, 262-63

prakyti-vikyti Modifications of prakrti that may be modified further. 31

pralaya Final dissolution of an effect into its cause; dissolution of the
universe (the alternate of creation); partial dissolution of a universe.
133, 144, 146, 303, 391

prama The process of proof, i.e., any valid experience; apprehension of
a state, condition, fact, object or entity not heretofore obtained. The
end result is mind and vrtt: becoming one. 151, 155, 156

pramada Negligence; failure in the practice of bhdvand (contemplation);
failure to practise the six virtues (of Vedanta). 324, 327

pramana Valid proof; instrument, means, method for reaching an
apprehension (pram) not heretofore attained. In Sankhya-yoga valid
proofs are pratyaksha (direct perception), anumdna (inference), and
dgama (revealed authority). 37, 47, 148, 149-51, 156, 373, 388, 390,
391-94

prana(s) The vital energy in any living being, which 1s regulated by the
fivefold pranas, each of which governs a particular energy flow: prana
regulates inhalation; apana regulates exhalation and excretion; samdna
regulates digestion and distribution of energy and nutrients; udadna
regulates the upward movement of pra@na (as 1n coughing, sneezing,
and death), and v)G@na monitors the entire nervous, muscular and
skeletal systems and regulates blood flow. 43

pranamaya kosha_ Sheath of prana (in which the self 1s erroneously
thought to be the agent of actions). 245, 246

pranava The word OM There are several possible derivations of the
word pranava. pra + the verb nu, pra + ni + dha (as in pranidhana),
pra* nam, pra+ nit dha and av (pranidhatrs); pra + nir + vd, etc.
309-10.

pranayama (Prdna+ dyama.) Breath and prana control Control types
include such methods as rechaka, paraka, kumbhaka and nadi-
Shodhana pranayamas 331, 346-49

pranidhana Practising the presence, placing something near, in the
proximity of, to put something down. (From pra + ni + the verb dha.)
(See also bhavana.) 277, 279, 309, 316

pra-ni-dhatrs Those who practise the presence of God. 310

pra-nir-va To lead to nirvana. 310
GLOSSARY/INDEX 471
prapti The power to reach or touch the most distant things (a siddhi);
arrival; attainment. 168, 416
prarabdha Karma gathered from past lives, whose fruition includes:
assuming of incarnation in a species; the life span destined to be in this
incarnation; and the pain and pleasure ordained for the life span. 90
prasada Clarity and pleasantness (of the mind); pleasant clearness;
clarity; which suggests clear flowing water and indicates a state of
happiness, joyfulness and intense pleasantness felt in the mind. 212,
215, 265-66, 411-13
praisada A palace. 413
prasaida-guna Pleasantness of character. 102
prasadana Purifying; rendering clear; making happy; making serene;
pleasing; making pleasant. 340
prasajya-pratishedha Negation by direct statement (against a
possibility). 137
pra-sankhyana Discrimination between self (purusha) and non-self
(prakrti); realization of the difference between matter and the spiritual
self. A source of the name of the Sankhya philosophy. (See also
vashikara.) 32, 205, 210
prasanna Clear; still; suggesting the quality of clear and still water and a
pleasantness of mind that results from such clarity. 183, 362
pra-Shvasa_ Involuntary exhalation (the opposite of controlled
exhalation [rechaka]); breathing out visceral air. 329, 331, 348
prathama-kalpika Beginners at the first of the four levels of yogic
attainment. 77
prati-bandhin (prati-bandhi) That which impedes, hinders, resists,
opposes, checks, inhibits, blocks, prevents, annuls, etc. 419, 421
pratijfia Proposition (a term in the Indian five-member syllogism). 159
pratipa Opposite. 322
prati-prasava Dissolution of evolutes in reverse order of their creation;
effects dissolving into their causes and finally into prakyti; return of
the gunas into equilibrium in their ultimate cause (unmanifest prakyt:)
(See also prati-safichara.) 38, 95, 146
prati-safichara In Sankhya philosophy, the principle of orderly
dissolution of material evolutes into their causes in reverse order of
their evolution and development (sa/fichara); dissolution of the
universe and its phenomena. (See also prati-prasava.) 38, 42, 146
pratishedha Preventing; opposing; prohibiting; negating; voiding,
nullifying. 333
472, GLOSSARY/INDEX
pratishtha Establishing; foundation; basis. 162, 163
prati-tantra-siddhanta Principles peculiar to a given discipline of
philosophy or science. 23
pratiti Cognition, as in pratyaya. 179
pratyabhijfia Re-cognition. 189
pratyahara Withdrawal of senses from their objects. 107
pratyak (pratyafich) Inward (From prati ‘towards’ and the verb root
afich ‘to be directed’; ‘pointed or turned towards a certain direction’.)
320, 321-22
pratyak-chetana-adhigama Attainment of inward consciousness;
realization of the inwardly conscious (self). 320, 321
pratyaksha Direct perception or experience (one of the valid proofs
[pramanas]); it determines the specific where specific and general are
present. This definition 1s a pointer for the implicit, complete idea of
realization. True pratyaksha occurs in samprajfdta, when a reflection
of pure consciousness appears. (See also vogi-pratyak sha ) 149-55, 334,
354
pratyafich See pratyak
pratyastamaya The condition of wesis of the mind-field having set like
the sun (submerged, ceased) into the very source from which they had
arisen 25]
pratyaya An idea or experience being presented to buedcdii so that a
cognition may occur, cognition principle, causal principle of cognition,
causal cognition, cognition (pravit), cause, origin, that whence a
cognition as an effect proceeds 132, 17%, 179, 372
pravaha Flow 144
pravaha-anadi One who continues eternally through the cycles. 303
pravaha-chitta A flowing mind.1e .a Buddhist concept of the mind-
stream in which each successive wave gives the appearance of
continuity even though there is no continuous mind but merely a
succession Of waves 337
pravaha-nitya The modifiable eternal 1s manifested and unmanifested,
appears and disappears with creations and dissolutions 313
pra-vartaka, pra-varttaka = Involver, engager, initiator, promoter,
inducer, producer; instigator, urging and prompting one towards X
(Antonym: n-vartaka.) 138, 423
pra-vi-laya Dissolution. (See also pralaya.) 391
pra-viveka Increased and strengthened discriminating wisdom 214
GLOSSARY/INDEX 473

pra-vrtti Inclination; manifestation; direct perception; apprehension; a
manifest natural state; a natural mental state arisen; an intense vrtzi of
the mind-field, one that remains in concentration; a natural urge,
inclination or tendency; initiative; worldly inclination;
adventurousness. When a sustained concentration is such that the
intense vrrt: and the attendant inner experience are effortless and
become a natural mental inclination, that is pra-vrtti. 93, 102, 197,
350, 352, 355, 356

prayashah As a common experience; commonly. 221

prayatna Method; effort. 200, 348

prayoga-Shastra A text or science to teach a practical method (whereby
the yogi may sunder purusha’s connection with prakrti). 284

prayojana Purpose. 60

prema-bhakti-yoga Yoga of love and devotion. 92

priti. Feeling of love (with which one feels the desire “May | attain
yoga” through the @stika-buddhi). 266

punya Virtue; merit; virtuousness; the virtuous and meritorious;
meritoriousness; meritorious acts. 340, 342

piraka Prdndyama of controlled inhalation. (Antonym: shvasa.) 331

Puranas Ancient legends, stories, philosophies and histories;
cosmological texts often couched in a mythological form. 26, 170

purusha_ The conscious principle, ever-pure, ever-wise, ever-free; the
conscious being; the spiritual self; spiritual noumenon; the one in
whom knowledge reaches its ultimate dimension; the omniscient one.
The syncretic definition is “the Conscious Principle coupled with
Existence.” The Sankhya definition is “the conscious spiritual-energy
principle (theistic: incorporating God [ishvara] and souls [yivas]; non-
theistic’ incorporating individual souls [/ivas]).” 28-29, 42, 94, 106, 107,
109, 110, 111, 113, 212, 236, 295, 297-300

purusha-darshana-abhyasa The repeated practice of realizing and seeing
the spiritual self. 214

purushartha The purpose of purusha. Prakriti serves two purposes of
purusha- involvement and disinvolvement. Having served these
purposes of purusha, prakrtt withdraws. (From purusha + artha.) 255

purugha-khyati Discernment or realization of purusha. 212

purusha-vishesha_ Ighvara, the Lord; the special Conscious Being. 284

parva Anything past, former, anterior; preceding one; ancient; the very
first one, preceding creation; predecessor gurus. 305-8

pirva (pirvaka) Preceded by; having as a prerequisite or precondition.
248. 264
474 GLOSSARY/INDEX
raga Attachment; colouration; pleasure; attraction. (From the verb root
rafij ‘to colour; to be drawn towards, to be attracted to’, q.v.) Raga isa
klesha whose real name is great stupor (*nahd-moha). 44, 125, 137,
162, 169, 170, 191, 342
rajas_ A guna (attribute of prakrti), activity, endeavour, energy;
movement; producing pain; dust. Rajas impels and energizes,
overcoming stagnation. (See also prakrti, gunas.) 29, 30, 42, 112, 215
rajasic jiiana Active knowledge; knowledge imbued with rajas. 24
raikshasas Demonic beings. 104
Rama _ An incarnation of Vishnu. 30!
rafij To colour; to be drawn towards, to be attracted to. 152, 206, 359
rasa Body-fluid essence such as hormones, gastric Juices, etc.; essence;
juice; flavour, enjoyment. 68n, 326, 415
rasfyana(s) Derived from rasa, which refers to fluid esences of
anything: in alchemy—mercury; in herbal medicine—yjuice; in the
human body—all fluids. Hence rasayana refers to cleansing and
purification processes for rejuvenation or for spiritual objectives, etc.
68
rechaka The pranayama of controlled exhalation (the opposite of pra-
Shvasa) 331
rshi_ A sage who has reached the highest sarnzddht and who then
promulgates a science, text or tradition, an enlightened sage 3,5
yta The oldest word used in the Vedas for the Supreme [ruth of
universal and divine laws. 414
rtambhara = Truth-bearer; Truth-bearing, bearer of Supreme ruth.
414-15
rtambhara prajfia = Intuitive wisdom, I ruth-bearing, intuitive wisdom,
bearer of Supreme Truth, Wisdom 77, 85, 414-15, 420
ragdhi Conventional (meaning of a word) 18
Rudra Shiva as Dissolver. 302
riipa Nature; form, appearance; feature 162, 187, 218
sa-bija samadhi Seeded samadhi, samadhi with seed, i ¢ . with objects of
concentration (Glambanas), as with samprajfdta samadhi, q v. 242,
373, 409-10
sad (sat) Existent, reality (accurately seen only by the inner self directly
in concentration without the intervention of the senses, mind and
buddhi)—this 1s direct perception [yogi-pratyaksha]) 85
GLOSSARY/INDEX 475

sad-bhitta Real. 84

sadhaka_ AA spiritual aspirant. 12, 244

saha-bhi Natural accompaniment; correlate. 329

saha-karin Associate in an act; coefficient. 336, 429

sahasa Courage, such as embarking upon an endeavour without
considering whether it can or cannot be accomplished. 200

sahasa Quickly; suddenly. 348

sakshat-kara_ Realization; perfect or full realization; coming face-to-
face. The fourth and highest of the four stages of gaining knowledge.
154, 373, 390, 391

salambana With supportive factors; samprajfata samadhi, which needs
an object of concentration; sa-bija, q.v. (See also @lambana.) 242

sam-4-dha, samadhana_ Resolution or harmonizing of all conflict
(within and without); pacification; bringing together of all contrastive
factors, resolving and reconciling. Samaddhdna (freedom from all
conflicts) 1s one of the six treasures of Vedanta. (From sam + 4+ dha
‘to set together, join together [as of broken bones])’. 24, 67, 75, 251,
332

samadhi, samadhi-chitta§ N:rodha; harmony; meditation; absorption;
samadhana; mastery and control by the mind-field; also a Pali word
meaning “concentration” (one of the “three jewels” [along with sila
and pafifia] of Buddhism). In effect the entire first chapter of the
Yoga-sitras of Patafijali constitutes a definition of the samddhis of
yoga (Antonyms vyutthana, vyutthana-chitta.) 75-76, 82, 86-91, 108,
114n, 130, 134n, 218-47, 251, 264, 351

samadhi-prajia Samddhi-wisdom. 387, 399, 402

samadhi-prarambha The beginnings of samadhi, as in vikshipta when
sattva begins to gain ascendancy. 251-52

samadhi-sarnskara_ Impressions of the samadhi being created on the
mind ‘These impressions finally burn away even the past samskaras. 86

sam-a-dhiyate Becomes harmonized and established in samadhi; the
mind is free of polarities and conflicts. 269

samahita Harmonised, conflicts resolved (From sam + 4+ dhd.) (See
also sam-d-dh@ ) 332

samana See prana(s)

samanvaya Synthesis. 27

simanya General, generic, universal. (Antonym vishesha ) 152

sAmanya-ava-dharana-pradhana Primarily determining, chiefly the
determinant of 158
476 GLOSSARY/INDEX
samapanna Accomplished (as a samdpatti). 380, 384
samapatti Field of command; field of coalescence; apprehension;
accomplishment; encounter; transmutation; coalescence; attainment of
a state of consciousness; proficiency of the mind; the mind-field
dwelling on the object, becoming stable thereupon, and achieving
coalescence therewith. This coalescence of the mind with the object, so
that mind appears as though non-existent and only the object of
concentration remains, is samapatt: proper. The four samdpattis and
corresponding samprajfidta sama@dhis are:
sa-vitarka samapatti = sa-vitarka samadhi
nir-vitarka samapatti = nir-vitarka samadhi
sa-vichara samapatti = sa-vichara samadhi
nir-vichadra samadhi
nir-vichara samapatti =4 sdnanda samadhi
sasmita samadhi
(See also samprajfidta samadhi.) 355, 371, 373, 378, 380-81, 409
samaropa Superimposition. 127
samartha Capable; strong. 266, 353
samarthya Capability; intensified and increased capacity. 353, 354
samashti-chitta Univtérsal mind; collective mind. 299
samavaya-sambandha Inherent relationship. 288
sambandha_ Relationship, relationship or connection (rather than union
with); the relationship of the subject matter (vishaya) of a text, its
purpose (pravoyana), and a student’s qualification (adhikdrin). 60, 132
sampadyate Succeeds; prospers, reaches the desired enrichment; a
fulfilment in all directions, one comes to rest in the Supreme Self,
becomes filled with the Supreme Self 317
sampat Treasure. 67
sampatti Fulfilment; enrichment; perfection. 319
sam-pipadayisha Desire, intent or will to achieve fulfilment. 200
samprajnata samadhi The lower samadhi, also designated as sa-bija
samadhi; samadhi of wisdom; that samadhi in which wisdom comes to
its most harmonized, perfect expansion. Samprajfidta requires
supportive factors (alambanas, bijas), objects of concentration, The
nature of the @lambanas and the associated vrttis becomes increasingly
refined as the realization progresses through its four stages: sa-vitarka
(with discursive, gross, thought), sa-vichdra (with subtle thought),
s@nanda (with ecstasy, rapture), and sdsmita (with I-am-ness). (See
also samapatti ) 63, 218-20, 224, 409-10
GLOSSARY/INDEX 477
sam-prati-patti The perception of knowledge in consciousness
(derivative, yaugika, meaning); the continuity of usage (conventional,
radhi, meaning). 313
sarhsara Transmigration; continuous cycle of birth and death;
transmigratory cycles of creation and dissolution; the worldly
attractions from which the bondage of transmigration begins; worldly
cycles. (Antonyms: kaivalya, nirvana, moksha.) 89, 108, 167, 194, 216,
281
samshaya Doubt; (the mind) oscillating between two alternatives. 164,
324, 325-26
sarnskaras Impressions; imprints. (See also @Shaya, karmashaya,
vdsana.) 99, 140, 185, 286-87
sarhskara-Shesha Residual samskdras; that in which samskaras alone
remain as residue; where only the impressions of the past experiences
and karmas remain as deposits and no fresh karma is formed. 78, 248,
250
sarhsthana Configuration serving as foundation or substrate for
attributes. 388, 396-97
samuchchhaya Combination. 303
sarhvega Vehemence; speed; velocity; force; momentum; progress. .
Samvega implies a strong samskara from the past and a strong desire
and will. 271, 273
samyak-jiiana Correct knowledge. 213
samnyama Practice of the three internal limbs of yoga (dharand, dhyana
and samadhi) as one. 103
sarhyoga Union (a coming together of those that were separate). 132
sananda Ananda-accompanied; rapture-accompanied. (See also
samprajiidia samadhi.) 224
safichara Process of the development of evolutes from prakrt: to the
gross elements 42
sandhi_ A complex set of rules for euphonizing Sanskrit words, for
example yoga + anushdsana becomes yoganushasana. 20
sanghata-vada The aggregation doctrine of Buddhists of the —
Sautrantika and Vaibhashika schools. For example, according to
sanghata-vada an object such as a jar 1s simply a combination of
uncountable numbers of atoms and not their transmuted product
There are no cause and effect relationships between the atoms and the
jar. 395
safijfia Term; definition; name. 20, 205
safijiia-sitra A sirra that gives a definition, title, or topic. 20
478 GLOSSARY/INDEX
sankalpa A positive thought or resolution. (Antonym: vikalpa.) 381
sanketa Conventional usage and meaning; indication, denotation (as of
a word). 387, 389
sanketita | Indicated; shown by or pointed to by a sign. 390
sankhyana Permutation (a source of the name of Sankhya philosophy).
32
Sankhya-pravachana_ Enunciation of Sankhya. 8
Sankhya-trayi-pratipalaka “Guardian of the Threefold Sankhya,” a title
accorded to the Shankaracharyas. 39
sankirna Mixed; mingled; commingled; alloyed. 380
sankrama_ Transitional. 212
sannidhya Proximity. In the context of YS 1.4 sdnnidhyva means
compatibility of qualities and not time or space proximity. 132
sinumana Performing good acts of stupefaction. 44
saripya Simularity; assimilation; appearance of; identification with the
form of; identity. 122, 126, 128
sarva-bhauma_ Universal The samadhi of the spiritual self remains
unbroken It is universal, s@rva-bhaumia, the common ground of all
other operations of the compound personality (spirit and matter)
Literally, “that which remains in all bha@nus” (grounds or levels of
yogic achievement on the way to the highest sam@d/t) 77, 79
sarva-dharma-anu-patin That which relates to all characteristics. 403
sarva-dharma-atmaka That whose self-nature comprises all
characteristics 403
sarva-jfia Omniscient; all-knowing. 295, 298
Sarvajfia-bijam Seed of the omniscient 297-98
sarvajfiata) Omnuiscience 301
Sarvajiiya-bijam Seed of omniscience. 297-98
sarva-nirodha Cessation, dissolution or survdha of all 424
sarva-tantra-siddhanta Common principle(s) shared by all 24
sasmita With asmuta; asmutd-accompanied (See also samprajfidta
samadhi.) 224
sat Essence. 200
sati Pali word for smrti, q v. The most important of the “five strengths”
(indriyvas) cultivated in the Buddhist tradition (See also sati-pajthana )
268
GLOSSARY/INDEX 479
sati-patthana Pali expression for the presence of intentness and practice
of mindfulness. Practice of mindfulness is perhaps the most central
part of Buddhist meditation practice and includes mindfulness of body
(kaya), emotions (vedand), mind (chitta), and conditions (dhamma), as
well as cultivating repeated awareness (anussati in Pali), which in turn
includes mindfulness of exhalation and inhalation (@ndpana-sati). The
practice of constant mindfulness is also taught by yogis of the
Himalayas irrespective of their affiliations. 268-69
satkara Respect; positive attitude; reverence; adoration; devotion. 202
sat-karya-vada <A doctrine of Sankhya schools stating that the qualities
of objects pre-exist in their causes, that gunas are constantly
transmuted into their evolutes, and that a cause does not cease to be
simply because it is transmuted into an effect. “That which is not, does
not come into being; that which is, never ceases to be” (BAG II.16).
(See also a-sat-karya-vada.) 29-30, 97, 133, 395
satta-matra Existence only (without any conditions, productions,
evolutions or devolutions). 240
sattva (/) A guna (attribute of prakrti). The sattva guna is characterized
by purity, luminosity, lightness, harmony and the production of
pleasure. It is the purest aspect of the three gunas. (See also prakrti,
gunas) 29, 30, 42, 112 (2) God’s own essence and intelligence; the .
excellence of essence (being) and intelligence (knowing), the two being
intertwined and the one not subsisting without the other. This sattva is
not to be confused with the guna sattva. 283, 291
sattvic jfiana Pure, refined or luminous knowledge; knowledge imbued
with the sattva guna. 24
satya Truth (one of the ten immutables in the Lord). 301
sauharda Goodheartedness, amity, friendship. (See also maitri.) 343
saumanasya Good-mindedness. (From su ‘good, happy, harmonized’
and manas ‘mind’.) (Antonym: daurmanasya.) 331
sa-vichara With vichara; vichara-accompanied samadhi; accompanied
by subtle thought, a samadhi accompanied by subtle thought. (See
also samprajfidta samadhi, samapatti.) 224, 399
sa-vikalpa Accompanied by vikalpa, q.v., such as the coming and
going of thoughts with resultant superimposition and lack of clarity.
386
sa-vitarka With vitarka; vitarka-accompanied samadhi; accompanied by
gross thought; a samadhi accompanied by gross thought. .
Concentration in sa-vitarka samapatti 1s invariably accompanied by
the names of the objects of concentration. (See also samprajhata
samadhi. samapatti.) 380, 382, 389
480 GLOSSARY/INDEX

Shabda_ Word. 171, 380

Shabda-jfiana Verbal conception. 171

Shabda-jfidna-anupati (-anu-patin) Dependent upon a verbal knowledge
(conception) only. 171, 173

Shabda pramana Verbal proof; the same as gama, q.v. 173

Shabda-tanmatraé Subtle element of sound, from which space (akagha) is
created as the gross element. 386

Shabdena Through words; in the form of words; with the
accompaniment of words. 160

shad-angata Constituting six complements. 300

Shakti Pure energy; potentia (potential); immutable potentia; power;
force; potency; (inherent) power. 25, 109, 113, 120, 221, 301-2, 309

Shaktiman The omnipotent; he who has Shakti; the powerful one. 302,
317

Shama Quietude; pacification (one of the six treasures of Vedanta). 67,
69

Shanta Pacific; peaceful; calm; pacific attribute (a mayor personality
disposition, which buddhi assumes in association with sartva). 118,
126, 199

Sharira(s) Body; the system of the three bodies. the causal body (kdrana
Sharira or linga sharira) consisting of mahat alone, the subtle body
(siikShma Sharira), and the gross body (sthila Sharira). 244, 246, 261,
262

$his To impart a discipline or a teaching; to teach with a definite
discipline 71

Shashti-tantra The Book of Sixty, an ancient Sankhya text now lost 46

Shashvatika Perennial. 293

Shastra Revealed teaching, scripture, “the Law”; a text taught withina
tradition and with a discipline hence the entire science of yoga 1s
known as yuga-shastra; the eternal law which 1s synonymous with
God’s knowledge, the application of which is manifest in Ariya-shaku,
the power of action and creativity, by which the world comes into
existence and 1s maintained within the Law, the revealed teaching,
which is conveyed from the Lord to the individual siva so that the
latter may be raised and saved, the scripture itself in that verbal form
which is conveyed by siva to jiva, from teacher to disciple. 73, 283, 290,
291

shat-sampat The six treasures of Vedanta, constituting practices of
pacification: quietude (Shama); restraint (dama); withdrawal from
GLOSSARY/INDEX 481
worldly interests (uparati); forbearance (titikshd); faith, humility,
surrender (Shraddha); and freedom from conflicts (samadhdana). 67

Shavasana Corpse posture. 196

Shesha_ The curled-up snake of eternity, symbolizing kundalini, upon
which Vishnu as Preserver sleeps at the end of an aeon. Patajijali is
said to have been an incarnation Sf Shesha. 59, 60

Shishya Disciple; one taught with and within a discipline. 71

Shiva The Dissolver; Rudra, the Dissolver; the Benevolent One. 29,
300, 301-2

Shiva-yoga The yoga of Shiva. 92

Shoka A mutation of rajas, e.g., sorrow, grief, pain, suffering. 358

Shraddha One of the six treasures of Vedanta, connoting a gentle
quality associated with humility, reverent faith and surrender;
inclinations of faith such as generosity of mind, celibacy, charity, acts
of prayer; devotion; full clarity and pleasantness of the mind-field;
faith that samadhi is the only worthy goal and that one has chosen the
way of self-realization. 43, 67, 202, 204, 265, 266, 351, 365

Shravana_ Learning; listening to a teacher (the same as receiving
knowledge from agama pramdana); hearing the teaching. The first of
the four stages of gaining knowledge. 91, 390, 391, 415

Shrotr Listener; student. 161

Shruta Teaching; tradition; learning; hearing; teaching received orally.
387, 416

Shruta-prajfia Wisdom received from learning or from authority. 416

Shruti Vedic texts; revealed texts; texts taught orally. 390, 394

Shuddha Pure. 429

Shuddhi Purification. 391

Shukadeva Son of Vyasa. 378

Shinya Void, empty; devoid of. 121, 171

$hvasa_ Involuntary inhalation; uncontrolled inhalation; prana breathing
in external air. (Antonym: puraka ) 329, 331, 348

siddha One whois accomplished in the siddhis (yogic powers) 169

siddhis (/) Yogic accomplishments or so-called miraculous powers 103,
168-69 (2) The eight accomplishments of Sankhya philosophy (not to
be confused with the yogic siddhis). 45

siddhi-yoga Yoga of siddhis (accomplishments of powers). 92

sila Pali word meaning “conduct”; one of the “three jewels” (along with
samadhi and pafifia) of Buddhism. 88
482, GLOSSARY/INDEX

siv To sew. 18

smrti Memory; a vrtti called memory; contemplation; meditation
(dhyana), awakening of ekagrata; mindfulness; awareness; recollection;
remembrance; intentness; presence of mind; inspired lawbooks. (From
smr ‘to remember’. 143, 148, 185, 264, 267-69, 351, 390, 394

smrti-parishuddhi Purification of memory. 387

smrti-upasthana The presence of intentness (of the mind); the same as
Buddhist sat:-pafthana. 268

soham See hamsa-mantra.

sopana Rung (of a ladder). 27

sphota Unitary revelation of knowledge becoming word. One of the
fundamental doctrines in Indian philosophies of language, accepted by
philosophers of yoga, Vedanta and grammar, disputed by the
Mimémsa school. 383

sphuta Revealed; clear. 411, 412

srashtrtva Creativity (one of the ten immutables 1n the Lord). 301

stambhana Stoppage. 144

sthiti Stasis; a product of amas; stability; stagnation; veiling of the
force of sariskdras; heaviness; obscuration; deyection, feebleness;
stillness; settling down, stabilising, coming to rest (of the mind-field);
steadiness (of the mind-field); continued maintenance 93, 102, 198-99,
350, 425

sthiti-nibandhana Stabilising and rendering the stability permanent and
unshakable, making it binding and fastening it, that which effects
stability of the mind, chitta-prasddana. 341, 347, 356

sthiti-nibandhani The instrument of establishing, affirming, effecting,
sealing, the mind’s steadiness 350

sthilla Gross. 226

sthila-alambana_ Gross object of concentration 376

sthila Sharira Gross body. 246

styana Laziness, sloth, mental laziness; procrastination, mind’s idleness
Ihe mind refuses to settle down; it finds excuses, remains always
distracted and refuses to work (for the sddhaka’s purposes) 183, 324,
326

sukha Pleasure (an inherent attribute of the safrva guna); comtort,
those comfortable, acts undertaken with prayer or expectation of a
comforting or pleasant result. 43, 184, 231, 340

sikshma-bhita Subtle clements (tan-ma@tras) Not to be confused with
bhita-sakshma. 401
GLOSSARY/INDEX 483

siikshma Sharira Subtle body. 246

sikshma-vishaya(tva) Having subtle objects as the domain, field or
object of concentration. 399, 404, 407

sushumna The central subtle energy channel (ndqi) that flows along the
spinal column of the physical body. 65

sushupti The sleep state as different from or contrasted with
wakefulness and dream. In references to sleep the student should
determine whether sushupti as a state or nidra as a vrtti is intended.
(See also nidra.) 102n

sitra A unifying thread; something to sew with; set of aphorisms or
rules. 17, 115

sva_ Possession; one’s own property. 122, 292

svadhyaya Study of scriptural sentences leading to liberation; the fourth
discipline of the second aviga of yoga (nivamas); silent recitation; self-
study (sva-adhyaya) when the recitation is to oneself and not aloud;
japa of purificatories like OM; the study of scriptures that lead to
purification. 6, 229, 315, 318, 345

sva-karana-samvedya Experienced directly with one’s own
instrumentation. 352

svamin Proprietor; owner. 122, 292

svapna Dream. 361

svara science The science of breath rhythms. 366

sva-riipa One's (the selfs) own nature; own self-nature. 111, 114, 425

svariipa-Shiinya Devoid of its own form, as mind appears to become in
nir-vichara samadhi. 387

svatah-pramana_ Internally self-evident, self-authoritative (Descriptive
of texts or revelations in need of no proof external to themselves, but
upon whose authority other statements may be proved.) 5

svatantrata Sovereignty 301

svatva Possession (such as asnutd [l-am-ness]). 169

Svayam-bhi The “Self-Existent Being,” teacher of Brahma 70

tad-afijanata Achieving coalescence therewith 371, 378

tadatmya Being identical, for example, the obyect in question is one that
1s both universal and particular, generic and specific 153

tad-riipa-a-pratishtham Not established in, having no basis in, the form
of that (of a given object) 163

taijasa Beings with rayjasic ego 44
484 GLOSSARY/INDEX

tamas One of the three gunas (attributes of prakrti). Its qualities are
stability, stagnation, dullness, inertia, darkness, stasis, stupor. (See
also prakrti, gunas.) 29, 30, 42, 112, 168

tamasic jfiana Darkened knowledge; knowledge imbued with tamas. 23

tamisra Nocturnal (the real name of dvesha, q.v.). 168, 169, 170

tamo-dravya The substance tamas, which is as real as any darkness. 179

tan-matras The five modifications (evolutes) of tamasic aharhkara; the
five subtle elements in the subtle body: sound, touch, form, flavour,
odour. 33, 41, 168, 225, 230, 312

tantra The particular tradition or science. 296

tantriki paribhasha A technical term within a given discipline, tradition
or science. 230, 414

tanii-karana Attenuation; thinning down. 421

tapas Ascetic observance, power or practice; austerity (one of the ten
immutables in the Lord); reducing one’s material and physical
pleasures, luxuries, and the body’s dependence on objects. 202, 203,
301, 345

tarka Any thought accompanied by words; logic. 382

tat-ja (taj-ja) Arising from that; produced from that 419

tat-stha Stable on them. 371

tattva True reality; state; condition, fact, object, entity; principle, factor;
reality; real element, true nature. Literally, “that-ness” (rar-tva); the
essential nature of any object or entity 34, 42, 103, 151, 333, 421

tattva-darshana_ The realization of reality (one of the qualifications of a
realized teacher) 160

tattva-jfidna Knowledge of reality. 102

tattvas The five gross elements; the final evolutes of prakrti; space, air,
fire, water, earth (evolved in that order). 34, 42, 366

taushtikas Those who have experienced tushyi, a feeling of complacency
far short of the goal 263

tejas | Fire, light; lumination 385

tika A gloss or commentary on a commentary (bhAdshya) by subsequent
scholars 6

titikgsha Forbearance (one of the six treasures of Vedanta) 67

tivra Acute: fast, intense, as in “intense methods” (tivra-upa@ya), and
speedy, as in “speedy progress” (tivra-samvega). 271

tivra-sarhvega Those of speedy progress. 271
GLOSSARY/INDEX 485

tivra-upaya Those of intense methods. 271

trpti Satiety. 213, 301

tushti_ Feeling of complacency; the nine complacencies (four spiritual
and five external); philosophical complacency. 45, 258, 263

ubhaya koti Both of two possible categories simultaneously. For
example, a pendulum touches only one kos at a time but a string is
tied to both xkofis simultaneously. 369

udana See prdanas.

uddesha Name and title. 430

uddeSha-siitra A siitra that states the subject of a text or portion
thereof. 21, 61

upabhoga Enjoyment. 261

upadesha The teaching of one’s guru; a teaching. 266

upadhi A superimposed condition, not an inherent attribute or state; a
temporary condition; a condition external to the intrinsic nature of an
object or entity. 118, 374

upa-jana_ Increase or growth in strength. 344

upa-kaéra_ Benefit (conventional, ridhi, meaning); service (derivative,
yaugika, meaning). (From upa ‘near’ and kara ‘to do’, connoting “to
act in a certain way by mere presence.”) 13]

upa-karanas Instruments. 214

upalakshana Example, pointer, indicator. 102, 154

upanaya_ Recapitulation of cause (a term in the Indian five-member
syllogism). 159

upa-raga Being drawn towards; being attracted to; the process of being
coloured by, where colouring refers to vrttis produced in the mind
from external sources. (From upa ‘near’ and rafij ‘to colour, to be
attracted to’.) 149, 151, 152, 154

upa-rakta That which 1s drawn towards or coloured by 187, 359

upa-rama_ To turn the vrttis off. 250

upa-rafij To be coloured by something by reason of its proximity. (See
also upa-raga.) 187, 399

uparati Withdrawal from worldly interests (one of the six treasures of
Vedanta). 67

upasarga Encumbrance. 323

upa-Shama_Pacification, extinguishing; blowing out or snuffing out (as
of a flame). 98
486 GLOSSARY/INDEX

upaghraya Proximate object; serving as a support or source of
conditioning through proximity. 372

upa-tika A supplemental gloss on a gloss; a subcommentary. 6

upayas Means; instruments or methods of obtaining the desired ends
(of a science). Upaya incorporates not merely the concepts of method
and techniques but also attitudes of mind and a philosophy of life for
one who desires liberation. (See also up@ya-pratyaya.) 257, 265

upaya-pratyaya A samadhi whose causal cognition cultivated through
method accrues to true yogis, yielding knowledge of exact reality
(vathartham vastu). The methods (upayas) may be mild, moderate or
intense with respect to the following constituents: faith (Shraddha),
strength (virya), intentness (smrti), mental harmony (samadhi), and
discrimination from awakening wisdom (prajfiad-viveka). 256-58, 260,
263, 265

upayoga Use. 261

upeksha Indifference; equanimity. 213, 340, 344

utpanna (utpanna) Born; appeared; occurred; became manifest; an
advent having taken place. 350

utsaha Enthusiasm; perseverance; fortitude; firmness; exertion;
vigourous pursuit; zeal. 200

vachaka Signifier; signifying word or name; that which enunciates; that
which signifies. 309, 317-18

vachya That which 1s enunciated; that which 1s signified. 317-18

vaikarika Beings with satrvic ego. 44

vaikarika bandha_ Bondage by which one becomes attracted to the
celestial pleasures (as the videhas do) or by which a renunciate may be
drawn to the ordinary worldly attractions. 46, 290

vaikrta bandha (vaikrtika bandha) See vaikarika bandha.

vairagya Dzuspassion and control over desires for worldly or other-
worldly pleasures, state of being devoid of, free from, attraction (raga)
to objects reflecting into and colouring the mind, renunciation,
disinterest in the world (one of the ten immutables in the Lord).
Vairagya (dispassion) and abhydsa (practice) are the sine qua non of
achievement on the yogic path. (See also rdga.) 45, 91, 101, 105, 193-
97, 205, 206, 212, 301, 336

vaisharadya Proficiency and purity; the mind’s firmness in its stability;
that stream of concentration (stable flow) that receives and reflects the
clearly reflected image of the entire whole as well as the particular
aspects of the object of meditation. 411-12
GLOSSARY/INDEX 487

vaitrshnya A state of being free of all craving; a pure state of self-
knowledge. 212, 216

varttika An aphoristic statement that takes into account stated,
unstated-but-implied, and difficult-to-understand points of an original
sitra.9

vasana Imprint of actions (sarfskdras) left in the mind (the inclinations
that the strength of sarnskdras produce) and the inclinations or
propensities towards like maturations (vipaka) that develop in the
mind. Va@sanas le dormant in the mind until maturity of karma. (See
also @Shaya.) 133, 138, 216, 286-87

vasana-yoga The yoga of directing hidden propensities. 92

vaSha Control. 211

vashikara The fourth and highest order of vairdgya; the final stage of
apara-vairadgya, characterized by total and supreme control or
mastery. Herein one develops dispassion even towards the final
attraction, however faint, which may accrue to the realization of the
distinction between self and prakrti. The vashikara dispassion
indicates a wholly stabilised mind of total neutrality. 205, 206, 209,
210-11, 213, 341, 342, 351, 354, 368-70, 372

vaShitva Control over all elements and beings; ability to create,
rearrange or dissolve them (a siddhi). 169

vastu. External substance, real object; a reality. 151, 171, 264, 400

vastu-Shinya Devoid of substance, substantiality or a real object. 171

vayu Air The word vay is sometimes used for the praénas, q.v 43

vedana Emotions (a Pali word) 268

vedana-moha_ Confusion of feelings and emotions, wherein one does not
even know what 1s painful or pleasant to oneself. 192

vi-bhajyamana Being divided and separated. 380

vi-bhakta Dustinct, divided and separated 380

vibhu All-pervading. 356

vichara_ Rational thought, subtle thought; contemplation; movement of
mind from gross objects to subtler objects of concentration (vitarka
refined becomes vichGra) (From vi + char: ‘progressive movement’ )
(See also sa-vichdra.) 160, 218, 224, 229, 391

vichara-anugata A samddhi accompanied by (-anugata) subtle thought
(vichara); sa-vichara, q.v. 224

vichara-moha Confusion of thought processes 192

videha_ Bodiless even while dwelling in the body; the individual yogi
who has attained dissolution of the mind-field into original prakrti (a
488 GLOSSARY/INDEX

videha (continued) .
stage in the process of liberation). The videha state by itself is not the
Yoga-sittras’ definition of kaivalya or asamprajfidta. Yogis who, after
abandoning the physical body, continue to maintain the body consti-
tuted of mahat, ahamkara and mind are called videhas. Others say
videhas maintain the linga body (mahat) only. 146, 207-9, 232, 257-61

videha devas Bodiless, shining gods; bodiless, shining ones. (See also
videha.) 256, 259

videha-kaivalya The state of becoming bodiless even when dwelling in
the body. YS 1.19 clearly considers the videha state to be significantly
lower than karvalya (final isolation). (See also videha.) 146, 261

videha-mukti One who is liberated while yet dwelling in the body. (See
also videha.) 146

vidharana Restraint; control; expansion; the stretching or expanding of
the visceral air, maintaining it outside—not a quick or sudden intake.
Vidharana is the antidote to $hvasa (involuntary or uncontrolled
inhalation). 346-48

vidhi Order; ordinance; system. 301

vidhi-sitra A siitra that enjoins an act. 20

vidya Knowledge, proficiency in the tradition, texts, and particularly
the systematic method of practice. 202, 203

vidya-snataka One who has graduated in a science, i e., mastered a
science. One of the three types of graduates (along with vrata-snataka
and vid)d-vrata-sndtaka) 1n the ancient @Shramas 72

vidya-vrata-snataka One who has proficiency in a field of learning and
has demonstrated the mastery of personal disciplines. One of the three
types of graduates (along with vrata-sndtaka and vidya-snataka in the
ancient @Shramas.) 72

vijnana Ideation, idea. 336, 426

vijnanamaya kosha_ Sheath of knowledge (wherein an assumption of
delimited knowledge accrues). 245, 246

vijfidna-vada A Buddhist theory of “ideation only,” whereby no
external objects exist except as they are ideas within a universal idea
(@laya-viyfidna). 336

vijfiana-vadin One holding the vijfid@na-vdda view (darshana), not
accepting the independently real existence of perceptible objects ina
phenomenal! world 158, 336

vikalpa Imaginary cognition; linguistic misconception; false cognition,
option, alternation, alternative imaginary cognition; alternative nega-
tive thought, superimposition, fiction. 143, 148, 164, 171, 380-86, 394
GLOSSARY/INDEX 489

vikalpita Imagined; fictitious; processed as a vikalpa. 171, 177, 392

vikaras Products; modifications; evolutes of prakyti; categories of
reality consisting of sixteen evolutes (the eleven indriyas and five
bhiitas or tattvas). Also called vikrtis. 29, 31, 41

vikrtis See vikGras.

vikshepa Distraction of the sattvic mind by rajas and tamas; the nine
impediments ( YS 1.30) and their five companions (YS 1.31); obstacles.
83, 103, 204, 324-29

vikshepa-saha-bha Correlates or accompaniments of vikshepas. 329

vikshipta Distracted; the distrcted state (one of the five grounds or
states of the mind-field) wherein the mind is afflicted by vikshepas
(distractions of the sattvic mind by rajas and tamas). Although it is a
modification of and some improvement on the agitated kshipza state, a
vikshipta mind-field is not fit to be included within the category of
yoga since samadhi may occur only intermittently and in short bursts.
(See also chitta.) 62, 78, 83, 105, 329-32

vi-laya Dissolution; dissolving. 96

vi-ni-vyt To withdraw. 425

vipaka(s) Ripening (like a fruit), fruition of actions (derivative [yaugika]
meaning). The vipakas are (a) the species (/ati) in which one 1s reborn,
(b) one’s life span (@yus), and (c) pleasant or painful experiences
(bhoga) during the hfe span 256, 282, 286

vipakasShaya Domain or storehouse of vipdkas, q.v. (From vipaka +
G@shaya.) 287

viparyasta-pratyaya Inversion of awareness, i.e., turning the inward
consciousness outward and not dwelling in the seer’s own nature. 140

viparyaya Perversive cognition; false perception; false cognition; having
no substance, false knowledge; misapprehension; perversive ;
perception; confusion of philosophies; ignorance, which 1s of five
kinds: avidyd, asmutd, rdga, dvesha, abhinivesha. 44, 105, 127, 143,
162-70, 190, 325

vira_ A brave hero. 267

virakta Dispassionate; one who has reached varragya. 212, 213

virama Cessation; absence of all vrtts, causal awareness of the absence
of all cognition 248-50

virdma-pratyaya Awareness, the transcendent dispassion; that by means
of which one attains the transcendent dispassion, that cognition
(pratyaya) by which cessation of vrttis occurs in a-samprajnata.
Virdma-pratyaya equates to para-vairdgya. 248-50
490 GLOSSARY/INDEX

virdma-pratyaya-abhyasa Practice of the cognition of cessation of vrttis.
248, 250

Virat Cosmic Immanent form of the godhead (an example of which
may be seen in BhG IX, X, XI); the universe-form of God. 221, 227

virat-purusha Shining space-person; a being of godlike attainments. 369

virya Virility; vigour; strength; energy; potency; the qualities of a hero;
capacity to initiate; seminal strength of a celibate; endeavour with
regard to the eight arigas of yoga. 199, 264, 266-68, 351

vishada Depression (the mind clouded with tamas). 82

vishaya (/) Subject matter of a text. 60 (2) Subject or object of
experience, e.g., the subject of a memory as the object of a past
experience; domain; subjects; matters; objects of enjoyment; internal
object; sense object, field or object of thought; worldly objects. (See
also vishayavati.) 185, 186, 194, 205, 213, 356, 359, 373, 389

-vishaya In relation with; with regard to. 340

vishayavati Having sense objects; having sense experiences; having
objects of experience. Vishayavati are of two forms The lower form
operates within the realm of the subtle senses, elements, objects; and
the higher form operates in the realm of internal objects (vishayas),
which are constituted of the light of satrva. One of the two vishoka
samapattis, the manifestation of luminosities relative to objects in
buddhi. (See also vishaya.) 350, 355-58

vishayavati pravrtti Advent of direct perception of the experiences of
subtle or celestial sense objects. 350

viShesha Specific, particular; individual; distinction. (Antonym
sQ@manya.) 153, 275, 388, 416

visheshas Elements within the subtle body The wsheshas are distinct,
specific forms of matter (the final sixteen products of prakrti): five
gross elements, five active senses, five cognitive senses and the mind
(antah-karana) 35, 224-28, 352

viShesha-artha Having a special purpose, aim or significance. 416

vi-Shishta To be possessed (of), to be distinguished by, to be qualified
by 419

Vishnu The Preserver. 301-2

viShoka Beyond grief, free of grief or suffering 78, 355

vishoka jyotishmati The luminous or lucid one; the one without grief
and luminous, experienced at two levels: (/) as vishayavati, involving
experiences of lights and radiances as 1n a clear sky, and (2) as asmuta-
matra, involving reflection of purusha like an infinite, calm ocean
(without the lights as in vishavavati). 355-58
GLOSSARY/INDEX 491

vishva-bhedas Diversities of the universe, such as the forms of manifold
objects. 376

vita Devoid of. 359

vita-raga One who is devoid of attachment; one who is part of the guru
lineage, starting from Hiranya-garbha, and whose mind has perfected
vairagya (highest dispassion); a saint; a disembodied master who helps
aspirants. 359

vitarka Gross thought; thought accompanied by the names of the
particular objects of concentration. (See also sa-vitarka.) 218, 382

vitarka-anugata A samadhi accompanied by vitarka; vitarka-
accompanied; sa-vitarka, q.v. 224

vitrshna One who has lost a craving, been turned away from a craving,
or is free from a craving; one who is indifferent. 205, 206, 209

viveka Discernment; discrimination; discriminating wisdom; the
spiritual self. 193, 195-96, 210, 214, 264

viveka-khyati The separation of buddhi from purusha; discriminating
wisdom; the discernment by the buddhi of the distinction between
itself and the spiritual self (purusha). This discernment arises in the
fourth stage of samprajfiata when the mind-field and buddhi are
centered upon themselves. This is a quality, not an entity. 107-8, 135-
36, 303

vividisha The desire to know matters relating to spirituality, especially
the conscious principle. 43

vi-yoga Separation 75

vrata-snataka One who has demonstrated mastery of personal
disciplines One of the three types of graduates (along with vidya-
snataka and vidya-vrata-snataka) in the ancient GShramas.72

vrtti(s) (/) Operations, activities, fluctuations, waves, modifications (of
the mind-field), mental state. Vrtts are fivefold—pramdana (valid
proof), viparyaya (perversive cognition), wkalpa (imaginary
cognition), nidrd (sleep), and smrti (memory)—and of two types—
Alishta (painful [imbued with k/eghas]) and akiishza (not painful [not
imbued with k/eshas]) A secondary meaning of vrtt: is “means of
hvelihood,” as in “vyttis are the mind-field’s means of livelihood.” 38,
63, 93, 98, 122, 135, 148, 178 (2) Commentary by a disciple that 1s a
word-for-word explanation of (e g ) a master’s siitra. 6

vrtti-sarapya Identification with the form and nature of vrtriy 122

vyadhi Illness, the imbalance of body constituents (dhdtus), body juices
(rasas), and the eleven senses (Karanas) 324, 326

vyakhyata Defined; explained. 399
492 GLOSSARY/INDEX

vyana See pranas.

vyapadesha Designation; predication; the relationship of qualification
with the qualified. 174

vyatireka Deduction (logic); ascertainment. 152, 209-10

vyatireka dispassion The second vairdgya, i.e., ascertainment of where
one stands and what yet remains to be done en route to para-vairdgya.
209-10

vyavahara Usage; practical application; efficacy; practical transaction.
173, 388

vyavahara-parampara Continuity of usage. 313

vyutthana To get up, as from meditation, and to be wandering about;
the mind’s wandering from meditation; getting up, being away from
meditation; worldly disturbance; non-meditative; absence of
concentration; worldly involvement (of the mind). (Antonym:
samadhi.) 114, 117, 126, 202, 251-52, 419-20, 428

vyutthana-chitta) The mind-field involved with the ordinary world (in
act or thought); absence of concentration, as in kshipta and miidha.
(Antonyms: nirodha-chitta, samadhi-chitta.) 114

vyutthina-samskaras Samskdras of worldly involvements. 202

Yajfiavalkya, Yogi Famous metaphysician whose name appears
frequently in the Upanishads. 69

yamas_ Restraunts; the first of the eight angas of yoga: non-violence
(ahims4@), non-lying (satya), non-stealing (asteya), control of passions,
senses and mind (brahmacharya), and non-attachment (aparigraha).
145

yantra A visual (symbol or design) concentration for each chakra
following tantric norms. 365

yatamana The initial effort. 209

yatamfna dispassion The initial effort en route to para-vairagya.
learning what is of essence and what is not, uprooting the mind from
attractions; understanding the nature of freedom from craving;
inhibiting the senses from being drawn to worldly objects; and
reducing desires. 209

yatha-abhimata As agreeable; as desired; as favoured; as object of
choice. 365

yathartham vastu) Exact reality. 264

yatna Endeavour; effort. 198

yatra-kamavasayita See kama@vasayita.
GLOSSARY/[INDEX 493

yaugika Derivative (meaning of a word). 18

yoga Yoga is samadhi (and that samadhi is a universal attribute of the
mind-field). Yoga is the control of the modifications (vrttis) of the
mind-field (chitta). Yoga is that nirodha which leads to the seer’s
remaining in his own nature totally and permanently. “Yoga is
skillfulness (kauShala) in actions (karmas)” (BhG 11.50). The word
yoga may be derived from the Sanskrit verb yuj (4th conjugation),
meaning samadhi, or from yujir (6th conjugation), meaning samadhi,
or from yuj (10th conjugation), meaning “to join, restrain, keep under
control as in yoking.” The primary meaning was probably samadhi,
but there is much use of the sense of uniting, joining, yoking, in Vedic
and Upanishadic literature. For purposes of the Yoga-siitras it is
reasonable to accept Vydsa’s statement that the word yoga means
samadhi and that samadhi is a universal attribute of the mind-field.
60-61, 73-92, 93, 119, 286

yoga-bhrashta One who has fallen from the path of yoga. 325

yoga-nidra Yoga sleep (when the Lord rests after dissolution and before
the next creation); conscious sleep. 293, 364

yoga-Shastra The science of yoga (See also Shastra, anu-Shasana.) 73,
348 :

yoga-yantrita Controlled by yoga. 254

yoga-yukta One who is joined to God in yoga. 99

yogi One who practises yoga, q.v.

yogi-pratyaksha The supremely valid proof. During samprajfidta
without externals there appears a reflection of the pure consciousness,
chiti-shak ti: this 1s direct perception (yogr-pratyaksha) Reality (sad,
Sat) 1s accurately seen only by the inner self directly in concentration
without the intervention of the senses, mind and buddhi: this is the
yogi'’s direct perception (yogi-pratyaksha). (See also pratyaksha.) 85,
154-55, 354, 418

yogyata Compatibility. 132

yuj Yu; from yujyate means “practises samadhi”, yu; from yunaku also
means “practises samadhi”; yuj from yojayati means “joins, restrains,
keeps under control (as in yoking).” With the blending of oral
tradition, philosophy, common parlance and other factors the fine
distinctions of meaning have been blurred by time. The significant
thing is, however, that irrespective of the verb of origin, Vyasa has said
that yoga 1s samadhi. (See also yoga ) 73-74
The Himalayan Institute

Since its establishment in 1971, the Himalayan Institute has been
dedicated to helping individuals develop themselves physically, men-
tally, and spiritually, as well as contributing to the transformation of so-
ciety. All the Institute programs—educational, therapeutic, research—
emphasize holistic health, yoga, and meditation as tools to help achieve
those goals. Institute programs combine the best of ancient wisdom and
modern science, of Eastern teachings and Western technologies. We in-
vite you to join with us in this ongoing process of personal growth and
development.

Our beautiful national headquarters, on a wooded 400-acre campus in
the Pocono Mountains of northeastern Pennsylvania, provides a peace-
ful, healthy setting for our seminars, classes, and training programs in
the principles and practices of holistic living. Students from around the
world have joined us here for the past fifteen years to attend programs in
such diverse areas as biofeedback and stress reduction, hatha yoga,
meditation, diet and nutrition, philosophy and metaphysics, and practical
psychology for better living. We see the realization of our human poten-
tials as a lifelong quest, leading to increased health, creativity, happi-
ness, awareness, and improving the quality of life.

The Institute is a nonprofit organization. Your membership in the In-
stitute helps to support its programs. Please call or write for information
on becoming a member.

Institute Programs, Services, and Facilities

All Institute programs share an emphasis on conscious, holistic living
and personal self-development. You may enjoy any of a number of di-
verse programs, including:

¢ Special weekend or extended seminars to teach skills and tech-

niques for increasing your ability to be healthy and enjoy life

¢ Holistic health services

¢ Professional training for health professionals

¢ Meditation retreats and advanced meditation instruction

¢ Cooking and nutritional training

¢ Hatha yoga and exercise workshops

¢ Residential programs for self-development
The Himalayan Institute Charitable Hospital

A major aspect of the Institute’s work around the world is its construc-
tion and management of a modern, comprehensive hospital and holistic
health facility in the mountain area of Dehra Dun, India. Outpatient fa-
cilities are already providing medical care to those in need, and mobile
units have been equipped to visit outlying villages. Construction work
on the main hospital building is progressing as scheduled.

We welcome financial support to help with the construction and the
provision of services. We also welcome donations of medical supplies,
equipment, or professional expertise. If you would like further informa-
tion on the Hospital, please contact us.
eo e e e
Himalayan Institute Publications
Art of Joyful Living Swami Rama
Book of Wisdom (Ishopanishad) Swami Rama
A Call to Humanity Swami Rama
Celestial Song/Gobind Geet Swami Rama
Choosing a Path Swami Rama
The Cosmic Drama: Bichitra Natak Swami Rama
Enlightenment Without God Swami Rama
Exercise Without Movement Swami Rama
Freedom from the Bondage of Karma Swami Rama
Indian Music, Volume I Swami Rama
Inspired Thoughts of Swami Rama Swami Rama
Japji: Meditation in Sikhism Swami Rama
Lectures on Yoga Swami Rama
Life Here and Hereafter Swami Rama
Living with the Himalayan Masters Swami Rama
Love and Family Life Swami Rama
Love Whispers Swami Rama
Meditation and Its Practice Swami Rama
Nitnem Swami Rama
Path of Fire and Light, Vol. I Swami Rama
Path of Fire and Light, Vol. I Swami Rama
Perennial Psychology of the Bhagavad Gita Swami Rama
A Practical Guide to Holistic Health Swami Rama
Sukhamani Sahib: Fountain of Eternal Joy Swami Rama
The Valmiki Ramayana Retold in Verse Swami Rama
The Wisdom of the Ancient Sages Swami Rama
Creative Use of Emotion Swami Rama, Swami Ajaya
Science of Breath Swami Rama, Rudolph Ballentine, M.D.,
Alan Hymes, M.D.
Yoga and Psychotherapy Swami Rama, Rudolph Ballentine, M.D.,
Swami Ajaya, Ph.D.
The Mystical Poems of Kabir Swami Rama, Robert Regli
Yoga-sutras of Patanjali Usharbudh Arya, D.Litt.
Superconscious Meditation Usharbudh Arya, D.Litt.
Mantra and Meditation Usharbudh Arya, D.Litt.
Philosophy of Hatha Yoga Usharbudh Arya, D.Litt.
Meditation and the Art of Dying Usharbudh Arya, D.Litt.
God Usharbudh Arya, D.Litt.
Psychotherapy East and West Swami Ajaya, Ph.D.
Yoga Psychology Swami Ajaya, Ph.D.
Diet and Nutrition Rudolph Ballentine, M.D.
Joints and Glands Exercises Rudolph Ballentine, M.D. (ed.)
Transition to Vegetarianism Rudolph Ballentine, M.D.
Theory and Practice of Meditation Rudolph Ballentine, M.D. (ed.)
Freedom from Stress Phil Nuernberger, Ph.D.
Science Studies Yoga James Funderburk, Ph.D.
Homeopathic Remedies Dale Buegel, M.D., Blair Lewis, P.A.-C, Dennis

Chernin, M.D., M.P.H.
Hatha Yoga Manual I Samskrti and Veda
Hatha Yoga Manual II Samskrti and Judith Franks
Seven Systems of Indian Philosophy Rajmani Tigunait, Ph.D.
The Tradition of the Himalayan Masters Rajmani Tigunait, Ph.D.
Tripura Rahasya Rajmani Tigunait, Ph.D.
Yoga on War and Peace Rajmani Tigunait, Ph.D.
Sikh Gurus KS. Duggal
Philosophy and Faith of Sikhism KS. Duggal
The Quiet Mind John Harvey, Ph.D. (ed.)
Himalayan Mountain Cookery Martha Ballentine
The Man Who Never Died Dr. Gopal Singh
Yogasana for Health Yogiraj Behramji
Meditation in Christianity Himalayan Institute
Spiritual Diary Himalayan Institute
Blank Books Himalayan Institute

To order or to request a free mail order catalog call or write
The Himalayan Publishers
RR 1, Box 400
Honesdale, PA 18431
Toll-free 1-800-822-4547
